JBayesian Reasoning in
         Data Analysis
     A Critical Introduction




         Giulio D'Agostini
Bayesian Reasoning in
        Data Analysis
   A Critical   Introduction
This page is intentionally left blank
Bayesian Reasoning in
        Data Analysis
        A Critical Introduction




                                  Giulio D'Agostini
                                                Physics Department
                             University of Rome "La Sapienza", Italy




I © World Scientific
■   New Jersey • London • Singapore • Hong Kong
Published by
World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd.
5 Toh Tuck Link, Singapore 596224
USA office: Suite 202, 1060 Main Street, River Edge, NJ 07661
UK office: 57 Shelton Street, Covent Garden, London WC2H 9HE




Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
D'Agostini, G. (Giulio).
  Bayesian reasoning in data analysis : a critical introduction / Giulio
D'Agostini.
       p. cm.
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 981-238-356-5 (alk. paper)
    1. Bayesian statistical decision theory. I. Title.

QA279.5 .D28 2003                                          2003045082
519.5'42-dc21



British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.




Copyright © 2003 by World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd.
All rights reserved. This book, or parts thereof, may not be reproduced in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or any information storage and retrieval
system now known or to be invented, without written permission from the Publisher.




For photocopying of material in this volume, please pay a copying fee through the Copyright
Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA. In this case permission to
photocopy is not required from the publisher.




Printed in Singapore by World Scientific Printers (S) Pte Ltd
        To my parents, who always told me
         "crediti quello che ti puoi credere"
( "believe what you find it reasonable to believe").
This page is intentionally left blank
                                Preface



This book is primarily addressed to physicists and other scientists and
engineers who need to evaluate uncertainty in measurement. However, a
large portion of its contents should be of interest to anyone who has to
deal with probability and uncertainty, has an elementary background in
'standard statistics' and is wondering what this 'new statistics reasoning'
is all about.
    Although, like myself, you might never have heard about Bayes' theorem
during your studies, in recent years you will almost certainly have encoun­
tered, with increasing frequency, the term 'Bayesian' in articles, books and
the media. The so-called Bayesian methods are being employed in the most
disparate fields of research and application, from engineering to computer
science, economics, medicine and even forensic science. Some people are
going so far as to talk of a 'paradigm shift', in the Kuhnian sense, although
it is a strange revolution indeed which has its roots in the centuries-old
ideas of the founding fathers of probability - the likes of Bernoulli, Bayes,
Laplace and Gauss.
    The gist of Bayesian statistics is not difficult to grasp. At its base is the
intuitive idea that probability quantifies the 'degree of belief in an event
(in this context, an event is whatever can be precisely described by a propo­
sition). Now, degrees of belief can be framed in a mathematical structure
which allows the probability of an event A to be calculated on the basis of
the probability of other events logically connected to that event A. In par­
ticular, the probability of event A changes if other events are assumed to be
'true', provided these other events are 'stochastically dependent' on event A.
This is the essence of Bayes' theorem. As a consequence, Bayesian statistics
allows the probability of a hypothesis-event to be continually updated on
the basis of new observation-events that depend on that hypothesis-event.


                                       vii
viii          Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical introduction


     Most likely this is not the way you were t a u g h t (elements of) probability
theory. At most you might have been warned about the existence of a
'subjective probability' as an 'interpretation of probability', helpful in many
fields, b u t definitively not applicable in Science where 'you want to be
objective'. This is what I was t a u g h t in my training and was the approach
I adopted in research, until I suddenly realized t h a t there was something
wrong with those ideas and with the methods which resulted from them.
T h e breakthrough came when I myself h a d to teach probability and d a t a
analysis. Here is how several years later I reported my personal experience
in the bulletin of the International Society for Bayesian Analysis (ISBA
Newsletter, March 2000).

         It is well known that the best way to learn something is to
         teach it. When I had to give the Laboratory of Physics course
         to Chemistry students and introduce elements of probability
         and statistics applied to data analysis, I did as most new teach­
         ers do: I started repeating what I had learned years before,
         more or less using the same lecture notes. This worked well for
         explaining the experiments, but when I moved to probability,
         the situation was quite embarrassing. In the very first lecture
         I realized that I was not convinced of what I was saying. I
         introduced probability as the ratio between favorable and pos­
         sible cases, but I had no courage to add 'if the cases are equally
         probable'. I cheated by saying 'if the cases are equally possible'
         and moved rapidly to examples. The students had no time to
         react, the examples were well chosen, and I was able to survive
         that lesson and the following weeks.
         The problem returned when we came to the evaluation of mea­
         surement uncertainty, a typical application of statistics in sci­
         entific disciplines. I had to acknowledge that the reasoning
         physicists actually use in practice is quite in contradiction with
         the statistics theory we learn and teach. The result was that,
         whereas I had started the semester saying that subjective prob­
         ability was not scientific, I ended it teaching probability inver­
         sion applied to physics quantities.

I cannot speak of a 'conversion' t o Bayesianism, because at t h a t time (spring
1993) I had no alternative framework at my disposal. All books and lecture
notes I had were strictly ' s t a n d a r d ' . J u s t one book for economics students,
which arrived more or less by chance on my desk, contained, as a kind
of side remark, some examples of applications of Bayes' theorem. T h e
problems were so trivial t h a t anyone with a bit of imagination could have
                                  Preface                                  IX




solved them just by building contingency tables, without needing to resort
to probability theory and that 'strange theorem'. Subsequently, I worked
out more intriguing examples, I extended Bayes' theorem to continuous
variables and applied it to typical measurements in physics. Only months
later did I discover that a Bayesian community existed, that my results had
been known for two centuries and that there were (and there are) heated
debates between 'Bayesians' and 'frequentists'. I was a bit disappointed
to learn that my wheel had already been invented centuries earlier (and it
was turning so fast I could barely keep up with it!). But I was also glad to
realize that I was in good company. Only at this stage did I start to read
the literature and to clarify my ideas.
    I consider this initial self-learning process to have been very important
because, instead of being 'indoctrinated' by a teacher, as had happened
with my frequentistic training, I was instinctively selecting what was more
in tune with my intuitive ideas and my fifteen years of experience in frontier
physics.
    I am sorry to be bothering you with these autobiographical notes, but
I think they will help in understanding the spirit in which this book has
been written and its idiosyncratic style. (I hope, at least, you will find it
less tedious than the average statistics book.) For instance, you will find
continual, sometimes sarcastic, criticisms of 'conventional' statistical meth­
ods. I even refuse to call these methods 'classical', because this appellative
is misleading too (the term 'classical' usually refers to the approach of the
founding fathers of a subject area, but the reasoning of the pioneers of
probability theory was closer to what we nowadays call Bayesian). You
might wonder why I am so doggedly critical of these conventional methods.
The reason is that I feel I have been cheated by names and methods which
seem to mean something they do not. I therefore make it a central issue in
this book to show, by reasoning and examples, why many standard statis­
tical recipes are basically wrong, even if they can often produce reasonable
results. I simply apply scientific methodology to statistical reasoning in
the same way as we apply it in Physics and in Science in general. If, for
example, experiments show that Parity is violated, we can be disappointed,
but we simply give up the principle of Parity Conservation, at least in the
kind of interactions in which it has been observed that it does not hold. I
do not understand why most of my colleagues do not behave in a similar
way with the Maximum Likelihood principle, or with the 'prescriptions' for
building Confidence Intervals, both of which are known to produce absurd
results. At most, these methods should be used for special well-controlled
x           Bayesian   reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


cases, under well-stated assumptions.
     To continue with my story, some months after having taught my first
course, in an attempt to invent interesting problems for students, I wrote a
little program for spectrum deconvolution ('unfolding' in our jargon) which
several particle and astro-particle physics teams subsequently found useful
for analyzing their data. This gave me more confidence in Bayesian ideas
(but I continued to avoid the adjective 'subjective', which I still considered
negative at that time) and I began to give seminars and mini-courses on
the subject. In particular, lectures I gave in 1995 to graduate students at
University of Rome 'La Sapienza' and to summer students at the Deutsches
Elektronen-Synchroton in Hamburg, Germany, encouraged me to write the
'Bayesian Primer' (DESY-95-242, Romal N. 1070), which forms the core
of this book. I took advantage of the 'academic training' course I gave to
researchers of the European Organization for Nuclear Physics in 1998 to add
some material and turn the Primer into CERN Report 99-03. The final step
towards producing this book was taken in 2002, thanks to the interest of
World Scientific in publishing an expanded version of the previous reports.
    Instead of completely rewriting the Primer, producing a thicker report
which would have been harder to read sequentially, I have divided the text
into three Parts.

      • Part 1 is devoted to a critical review of standard statistical methods
        and to a general overview of the proposed alternative. It contains
        references to the other two Parts for details.
      • Part 2 is an extension of the original Primer, subdivided into chap­
        ters for easier reading.
      • Part 3 contains further comments concerning the general aspects
        of probability, as well as other applications.

The advantage of this structure is that the reader should be able to get
an overall view of problems and proposed solutions and then decide if he
or she wants to enter into details. I hope this organization of the contents
will suit the typical reader, whom I find it hard to imagine wishing to read
sequentially a tome of over three hundred pages! This structure also allows
the book to be read at several levels. For example, most of chapters 1, 2, 3, 5
and 10, which are the most important as far as the basic ideas are concerned,
do not require advanced mathematical skills and can be understood by the
general reader. However, organizing things in this manner has inevitably
led to some repetition. I have tried to keep repetitions to a minimum, but
repetita juvant, especially in this subject where the real difficulty lies not
                                                  Preface                  XI



in understanding the formalism, but in shaking off deep-rooted prejudices.
    A comment about the title of this book is in order. A title closer to
the spirit of the approach proposed here would have been "Probabilistic
reasoning . . . ". In fact, the term 'Bayesian' might seem somewhat narrow,
as if I am implying that the methods illustrated here always require explicit
use of Bayes' theorem. However, in common usage, 'Bayesian' has come
to mean 'based on the intuitive idea of probability'. Thus, what is known
as the Bayesian approach is effectively a theory of uncertainty which is
applicable universally. Within it, 'probability' has the same meaning for
everybody: precisely that meaning which the human mind has developed
naturally and which frequentists have tried to kill. Therefore, I have kept
the term 'Bayesian' in the title, with the hope of attracting the attention
of those who are curious about what 'Bayesian' might mean.
    This book is based on the work of several years, during which I have had
the opportunity to interact, directly or indirectly, with a large variety of
persons, most of them physicists and physics students of many nationalities,
but also mathematicians, statisticians, metrologists and science historians
and philosophers. In particular, the interest shown by those who attended
the lectures, and also the criticisms of those who had strong prejudices to­
wards the approach I was presenting, has been highly stimulating. I take
this opportunity to thank them all. Special acknowledgements go to Ro­
mano Scozzafava for many discussions about the fundamental aspects of
probability theory. The many clarifications about DIN and ISO recom­
mendations received by Klaus Weise of the PTB Braunschweig (Germany)
have been particularly useful. I would like to thank Paolo Agnoli, Pia
Astone, Peppe Degrassi, Volker Dose, Fritz Frohner, Ken Hanson, Frank
Lad, Daniela Monaldi, Gianni Penso, Mirko Raso, Stefan Schlenstedt, My­
ron Tribus and Giinter Zech for discussions and critical comments on the
manuscript, as well on the on the old version of the Primer [1] and the
CERN Report [2] on which this book is based. Finally I would like to
thank Jim Mc Manus for his help in finding ways to better express my
ideas in English (apart from this sentence) and Bruno Pellizzoni for tech­
nical support with many of the drawings.


Rome, March 2003

Email: g i u l i o . dagostini@romal. inf n. i t
URL: h t t p : / / w w w . r o m a ! . i n f n . i t / ~ d a g o s /
This page is intentionally left blank
                             Contents




Part 1 Critical review and outline of the Bayesian
alternative                                        1
1.   Uncertainty in physics and the usual methods of handling it          3
      1.1   Uncertainty in physics                                        3
      1.2   True value, error and uncertainty                             5
      1.3   Sources of measurement uncertainty                            6
      1.4   Usual handling of measurement uncertainties                   7
      1.5   Probability of observables versus probability of
            'true values'                                                  9
      1.6   Probability of the causes                                     11
      1.7   Unsuitability of frequentistic confidence intervals           11
      1.8   Misunderstandings caused by the standard paradigm of
            hypothesis tests                                              15
      1.9   Statistical significance versus probability of hypotheses .   19

2.   A probabilistic theory of measurement uncertainty                    25
      2.1   Where to restart from?                                        25
      2.2   Concepts of probability                                       27
      2.3   Subjective probability                                        29
      2.4   Learning from observations: the 'problem of induction'    .   32
      2.5   Beyond Popper's falsification scheme                          34

                                     xiii
xiv           Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


      2.6  From the probability of the effects to the probability of
           the causes                                                          34
      2.7 Bayes' theorem for uncertain quantities                              36
      2.8 Afraid of 'prejudices'? Logical necessity versus frequent
           practical irrelevance of priors                                     37
      2.9 Recovering standard methods and short-cuts to Bayesian
           reasoning                                                           39
      2.10 Evaluation of measurement uncertainty: general scheme .             41
           2.10.1 Direct measurement in the absence of systematic
                    errors                                                     41
           2.10.2 Indirect measurements                                        42
           2.10.3 Systematic errors                                            43
           2.10.4 Approximate methods                                          46


Part 2       A Bayesian primer                                                 49
3.    Subjective probability and Bayes' theorem                                51
       3.1  What is probability?                                               51
       3.2  Subjective definition of probability                               52
       3.3  Rules of probability                                               55
       3.4  Subjective probability and 'objective' description of the
            physical world                                                     58
       3.5 Conditional probability and Bayes' theorem                          60
            3.5.1    Dependence of the probability on the state of
                     information                                               60
            3.5.2    Conditional probability                                   61
            3.5.3    Bayes' theorem                                            63
            3.5.4    'Conventional' use of Bayes' theorem                      66
       3.6 Bayesian statistics: learning by experience                         68
       3.7 Hypothesis 'test' (discrete case)                                   71
            3.7.1    Variations over a problem to Newton                       72
       3.8 Falsificationism and Bayesian statistics                            76
       3.9 Probability versus decision                                         76
       3.10 Probability of hypotheses versus probability of
            observations                                                       77
       3.11 Choice of the initial probabilities (discrete case)                78
            3.11.1 General criteria                                            78
            3.11.2 Insufficient reason and Maximum Entropy . . . .             81
                                 Contents                                  xv


      3.12 Solutionto some problems                                       82
           3.12.1  AIDS test                                              82
           3.12.2  Gold/silver ring problem                               83
           3.12.3  Regular or double-head coin?                           84
           3.12.4  Which random generator is responsible for the
                   observed number?                                        84
      3.13 Some further examples showing the crucial role of
           background knowledge                                            85

4.   Probability distributions (a concise reminder)                        89
      4.1   Discrete variables                                             89
      4.2   Continuous variables: probability and probability density
            function                                                       92
      4.3   Distribution of several random variables                       98
      4.4   Propagation of uncertainty                                    104
      4.5   Central limit theorem                                         108
            4.5.1    Terms and role                                       108
            4.5.2    Distribution of a sample average                     Ill
            4.5.3    Normal approximation of the binomial and of the
                     Poisson distribution                                 Ill
            4.5.4    Normal distribution of measurement errors . . .      112
            4.5.5    Caution                                              112
      4.6   Laws of large numbers                                         113

5.   Bayesian inference of continuous quantities                          115
      5.1   Measurement error and measurement uncertainty . . . .         115
            5.1.1   General form of Bayesian inference                    116
      5.2   Bayesian inference and maximum likelihood                     118
      5.3   The dog, the hunter and the biased Bayesian estimators .      119
      5.4   Choice of the initial probability density function            120
            5.4.1   Difference with respect to the discrete case . . .    120
            5.4.2   Bertrand paradox and angels' sex                      121

6.   Gaussian likelihood                                                  123
      6.1   Normally distributed observables                               123
      6.2   Final distribution, prevision and credibility intervals of the
            true value                                                     124
      6.3   Combination of several measurements - Role of priors . . 125
xvi           Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


           6.3.1    Update of estimates in terms of Kalman filter . . 126
      6.4  Conjugate priors                                           126
      6.5  Improper priors — never take models literally!             127
      6.6  Predictive distribution                                    127
      6.7  Measurements close to the edge of the physical region . . 128
      6.8  Uncertainty of the instrument scale offset                 131
      6.9  Correction for known systematic errors                     133
      6.10 Measuring two quantities with the same instrument
           having an uncertainty of the scale offset                  133
      6.11 Indirect calibration                                       136
      6.12 The Gauss derivation of the Gaussian                       137

7.    Counting experiments                                                     141
       7.1   Binomially distributed observables                                141
             7.1.1    Observing 0% or 100%                                     145
             7.1.2    Combination of independent measurements . . .            146
             7.1.3    Conjugate prior and many data limit                      146
       7.2   The Bayes problem                                                 148
       7.3   Predicting relative frequencies - Terms and interpretation
             of Bernoulli's theorem                                            148
       7.4   Poisson distributed observables                                   152
             7.4.1    Observation of zero counts                               154
       7.5   Conjugate prior of the Poisson likelihood                         155
       7.6   Predicting future counts                                          155
       7.7   A deeper look to the Poissonian case                              156
             7.7.1    Dependence on priors — practical examples . . .          156
             7.7.2    Combination of results from similar experiments          158
             7.7.3    Combination of results: general case                     160
             7.7.4    Including systematic effects                             162
             7.7.5    Counting measurements in the presence of
                      background                                               165

8.    Bypassing Bayes' theorem for routine applications                        169
       8.1   Maximum likelihood and least squares as particular cases
             of Bayesian inference                                             169
       8.2   Linear fit                                                        172
       8.3   Linear fit with errors on both axes                               175
       8.4   More complex cases                                                176
                                  Contents                               xvii


      8.5     Systematic errors and 'integrated likelihood'              177
      8.6     Linearization of the effects of influence quantities
              and approximate formulae                                   178
      8.7     BIPM and ISO recommendations                               181
      8.8     Evaluation of type B uncertainties                         183
      8.9     Examples of type B uncertainties                           184
      8.10    Comments on the use of type B uncertainties                186
      8.11    Caveat concerning the blind use of approximate methods     189
      8.12    Propagation of uncertainty                                 191
      8.13    Covariance matrix of experimental results - more details   192
              8.13.1 Building the covariance matrix of experimental
                       data                                              192
                       8.13.1.1    Offset uncertainty                    193
                       8.13.1.2    Normalization uncertainty             195
                       8.13.1.3    General case                          196
       8.14   Use and misuse of the covariance matrix to fit
              correlated data                                            197
              8.14.1 Best estimate of the true value from
                       two correlated values                             197
              8.14.2 Offset uncertainty                                  198
              8.14.3 Normalization uncertainty                           198
              8.14.4 Peelle's Pertinent Puzzle                           202

9.    Bayesian unfolding                                                 203
       9.1    Problem and typical solutions                              203
       9.2    Bayes' theorem stated in terms of causes and effects . . . 204
       9.3    Unfolding an experimental distribution                     205


Part 3         Further comments, examples and applica­
tions                                                209
10.    Miscellanea on general issues in probability and inference        211
       10.1 Unifying role of subjective approach                       211
       10.2 Frequentists and combinatorial evaluation of probability . 213
       10.3 Interpretation of conditional probability                  215
       10.4 Are the beliefs in contradiction to the perceived
            objectivity of physics?                                    216
       10.5 Frequentists and Bayesian 'sects'                          220
xviii             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


                10.5.1 Bayesian versus frequentistic methods                       221
                10.5.2 Subjective or objective Bayesian theory? . . . .            222
                10.5.3 Bayes' theorem is not everything                            226
        10.6    Biased Bayesian estimators and Monte Carlo checks of
                Bayesian procedures                                                226
        10.7    Frequentistic coverage                                             229
                10.7.1 Orthodox teacher versus sharp student -
                        a dialogue by George Gabor                                 232
        10.8    Why do frequentistic hypothesis tests'often work'? . . .           233
        10.9    Comparing 'complex' hypotheses - automatic Ockham'
                Razor                                                              239
        10.10   Bayesian networks                                                  241
                10.10.1 Networks of beliefs - conceptual and practical
                        applications                                               241
                10.10.2 The gold/silver ring problem in terms of Bayesian
                        networks                                                   242

11.     Combination of experimental results: a closer look                         247
        11.1 Use and misuse of the standard combination rule                       247
        11.2 'Apparently incompatible' experimental results                        249
        11.3 Sceptical combination of experimental results                         252
             11.3.1 Application to e'/e                                            259
             11.3.2 Posterior evaluation of at                                     262

12.     Asymmetric uncertainties and nonlinear propagation                         267
        12.1 Usual combination of 'statistic and systematic errors' . .            267
        12.2 Sources of asymmetric uncertainties in standard statistical
             procedures                                                            269
             12.2.1 Asymmetric \2 and 'A%2 = 1 rule'                               269
             12.2.2 Systematic effects                                             272
                      12.2.2.1 Asymmetric beliefs on systematic
                                 effects                                           273
                      12.2.2.2   Nonlinear propagation of
                                 uncertainties                                     273
        12.3 General solution of the problem                                       273
        12.4 Approximate solution                                                  275
             12.4.1 Linear expansion around E(X)                                   276
             12.4.2 Small deviations from linearity                                278
                                   Contents                                xix


      12.5 Numerical examples                                             280
      12.6 The non-monotonic case                                         282

13.   Which priors for frontier physics?                                  285
        13.1 Frontier physics measurements at the limit to the detector
             sensitivity                                                  285
        13.2 Desiderata for an optimal report of search results . . . .   286
        13.3 Master example: Inferring the intensity of a Poisson
             process in the presence of background                        287
        13.4 Modelling the inferential process                            288
        13.5 Choice of priors                                             288
             13.5.1 Uniform prior                                         289
             13.5.2 Jeffreys' prior                                       290
             13.5.3 Role of priors                                        292
             13.5.4 Priors reflecting the positive attitude of
                       researchers                                        292
        13.6 Prior-free presentation of the experimental evidence . . .   295
        13.7 Some examples of 7?.-function based on real data             298
        13.8 Sensitivity bound versus probabilistic bound                 299
        13.9 Open versus closed likelihood                                302


Part 4         Conclusion                                                 305
14.     Conclusions and bibliography                                      307
        14.1   About subjective probability and Bayesian inference . . . 307
        14.2   Conservative or realistic uncertainty evaluation?         308
        14.3   Assessment of uncertainty is not a mathematical game . 310
        14.4   Bibliographic note                                        310

Bibliography                                                              313

Index                                                                     325
This page is intentionally left blank
              Part 1


Critical review and outline of the
       Bayesian alternative
This page is intentionally left blank
                                   Chapter 1

        Uncertainty in physics
 and the usual methods of handling it


                                     "In almost all circumstances, and at all times,
                                         we find ourselves in a state of uncertainty.
                                                         Uncertainty in every sense.
                          Uncertainty about actual situations, past and present...
                             Uncertainty in foresight: this would not be eliminated
                     or diminished even if we accepted, in its most absolute form,
           the principle of determinism; in any case, this is no longer in fashion.
              Uncertainty in the face of decisions: more than ever in this case...
               Even in the field of tautology (i.e of what is true or false by mere
           definition, independently of any contingent circumstances) we always
                           find ourselves in a state of uncertainty ... (for instance,
                   of what is the seventh, or billionth, decimal place of n      ...)..."
                                                                   (Bruno de Finetti)




1.1    Uncertainty in physics

It is fairly well accepted among physicists that any conclusion which results
from a measurement is affected by a degree of uncertainty. Let us remember
briefly the reasons which prevent us from reaching certain statements. Fig­
ure 1.1 sketches the activity of physicists (or of any other scientist). From
experimental data one wishes to determine the value of a given quantity,
or to establish which theory describes the observed phenomena better. Al­
though they are often seen as separate, both tasks may be viewed as two
sides of the same process: going from observations to hypotheses. In fact,
they can be stated in the following terms.

      A: Which values are (more) compatible with the definition of the mea-
         surand, under the condition that certain numbers have been ob-

                                          3
4             Bayesian   reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction



                                ( Observations )


                     Value of               (*)          Theory
                    a quantity                           (model)




                    continuous ( H y p o t h e s e s )    discrete

Fig. 1.1 From observations to hypotheses. The link between value of a quantity and
theory is a reminder that sometimes a physics quantity has meaning only within a given
theory or model. The arrows observations —> hypotheses should not give the impression
that the observation alone produces Knowledge (see Sees. 2.4 and 2.8).




         served on instruments (and subordinated to all the available knowl­
         edge about the instrument and the measurand)?
      B: Which theory is (more) compatible with the observed phenomena
         (and subordinated to the credibility of the theory, based also on
         aesthetics and simplicity arguments)?

The only difference between the two processes is that in the first the number
of hypotheses is virtually infinite (the quantities are usually supposed to
assume continuous values), while in the second it is discrete and usually
small.
    The reasons why it is impossible to reach the ideal condition of certain
knowledge, i.e. only one of the many hypotheses is considered to be true and
all the others false, may be summarized in the following, well-understood,
scheme.

A: As far as the determination of the value of a quantity is concerned, one
   says that "uncertainty is due to measurement errors".
B: In the case of a theory, we can distinguish two subcases:

    (Bi) The law is probabilistic, i.e. the observations are not just a logical
         consequence of the theory. For example, tossing a regular coin, the
             Uncertainty   in physics and the usual methods of handling it              5


       three sequences of heads (h) and tails (t)

                              hhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh
                              hhttttthhrihthhtthhhththht
                              ttttttttttttttttttttttttt

      have the same probability of being observed (as any other sequence).
      Hence, there is no way of reaching a firm conclusion about the regu­
      larity of a coin after an observed sequence of any particular length. 1
 (B2) The law is deterministic. But this property is only valid in principle,
      as can easily be understood. In fact, in all cases the actual observa­
      tions also depend on many other factors external to the theory, such
      as initial and boundary conditions, influence factors, experimental
      errors, etc. All unavoidable uncertainties on these factors mean that
      the link between theory and observables is of a probabilistic nature
      in this case too.


1.2    True value, error and uncertainty

Let us start with case A. A first objection would be "What does it mean that
uncertainties are due to errors? Isn't this just tautology?". Well, the nouns
'error' and 'uncertainty', although currently used almost as synonyms, are
related to different concepts. This is a first hint that in this subject there is
neither uniformity of language, nor of methods. For this reason the metro-
logical organizations have made great efforts to bring some order into the
field [3,4,5,6, 7]. In particular, the International Organization for Stan­
dardization (ISO) has published a "Guide to the expression of uncertainty
in measurement''[5], containing definitions, recommendations and practical
examples. Consulting the 'ISO Guide' we find the following definitions.

  • Uncertainty: "a parameter, associated with the result of a measurement,
    that characterizes the dispersion of the values that could reasonably be
    attributed to the measurement."
  • Error: "the result of a measurement minus a true value of the measur-
    and."
   1
    B u t after observation of the first sequence one would strongly suspect that the coin
had two heads, if one had no means of directly checking the coin. The concept of
probability will be used, in fact, to quantify the degree of such suspicion.
6                 Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


          One has to note the following.

     • The ISO definition of uncertainty defines the concept; as far as the
       operative definition is concerned, they recommend the 'standard un­
       certainty', i.e. the standard deviation (a) of the possible values that
       the measurand may assume (each value is weighted with its 'degree of
       belief in a way that will become clear later).
     • It is clear that the error is usually unknown, as follows from the defi­
       nition.
     • The use of the article 'a' (instead of 'the') when referring to 'true value'
       is intentional, and rather subtle (see point 1 of next section).

       Also the ISO definition of true value differs from that of standard text­
    books. One finds, in fact:

     • true value: "a value compatible with the definition of a given particular
       quantity."

    This definition may seem vague, but it is more practical and pragmatic,
    and of more general use, than "the value obtained after an infinite series of
    measurements performed under the same conditions with an instrument not
    affected by systematic errors." For instance, it holds also for quantities for
    which it is not easy to repeat the measurements, and even for those cases
    in which it makes no sense to speak about repeated measurements under
    the same conditions.


    1.3     Sources of measurement uncertainty

    It is worth reporting the sources of uncertainty in measurement as listed
    by the ISO Guide:

'         1 incomplete definition of the measurand;
          2 imperfect realization of the definition of the measurand;
          3 non-representative sampling — the sample measured may not
            represent the measurand;
          4 inadequate knowledge of the effects of environmental conditions
             on the measurement, or imperfect measurement of environmen­
             tal conditions;
          5 personal bias in reading analogue instruments;
          6 finite instrument resolution or discrimination threshold;
             Uncertainty   in physics and the usual methods of handling it             7


       7 inexact values of measurement standards and reference materi­
         als;
       8 inexact values of constants and other parameters obtained from
         external sources and used in the data-reduction algorithm;
       9 approximations and assumptions incorporated in the measure­
         ment method and procedure;
       10 variations in repeated observations of the measurand under ap­
         parently identical conditions."

These do not need to be commented upon. Let us just give examples of the
first two sources.

(1) If one has to measure the gravitational acceleration g at sea level, with­
    out specifying the precise location on the earth's surface, there will be
    a source of uncertainty because many different — even though 'intrin­
    sically very precise' — results are consistent with the definition of the
    measurand. 2 What is then 'the' true value?
(2) The magnetic moment of a neutron is, in contrast, an unambiguous
    definition, but there is the experimental problem of performing exper­
    iments on isolated neutrons.

In terms of the usual jargon, one may say that sources 1-9 are related to
systematic effects and 10 to statistical effects. Some caution is necessary
regarding the sharp separation of the sources, which is clearly somehow
artificial. In particular, all sources 1-9 may contribute to 10, because each
of them depends upon the precise meaning of the clause "under apparently
identical conditions" (one should talk, more precisely, about 'repeatability
conditions'[5]). In other words, if the various effects change during the
time of measurement, without any possibility of monitoring them, they
contribute to the random error.


1.4     Usual handling of measurement uncertainties

The present situation concerning the treatment of measurement uncertain­
ties can be summarized as follows.
   2
   It is then clear that the definition of true value implying an indefinite series of
measurements with ideal instrumentation gives the illusion that the true value is unique.
The ISO definition, instead, takes into account the fact that measurements are performed
under real conditions and can be accompanied by all the sources of uncertainty in the
above list.
8              Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical     introduction


    • Uncertainties due to statistical errors are currently treated using the
      frequentistic concept of 'confidence interval', although
      — there are well-known cases — of great relevance in frontier physics
       — in which the approach is not applicable (e.g. small number of
       observed events, or measurement close to the edge of the physical
       region);
      — the procedure is rather unnatural, and in fact the interpretation of
       the results is unconsciously subjective (as will be discussed later).
    • There is no satisfactory theory or model to treat uncertainties due to
      systematic errors 3 consistently. Only ad hoc prescriptions can be found
      in the literature and in practice ( "my supervisor says . . . "): "add them
      linearly"; "add them linearly if..., else add them quadratically"; "don't
       add them at all".4 The fashion at the moment is to add them quadrat­
      ically if they are considered to be independent, or to build a covariance
      matrix of statistical and systematic contribution to treat the general
      case. In my opinion, besides all the 'theoretically' motivated excuses for
      justifying this praxis, there is simply the reluctance of experimentalists
      to combine linearly 10, 20 or more contributions to a global uncertainty,
      as the (out of fashion) 'theory' of maximum bounds would require. 5
The problem of interpretation will be treated in the next section. For the
moment, let us see why the use of standard propagation of uncertainty,
namely

                                 —— I a2(Xi) + correlation terms ,                   (1.1)

is not justified (especially if contributions due to systematic effects are
included). This formula is derived from the rules of probability distribu­
tions, making use of linearization (a usually reasonable approximation for
routine applications). This leads to theoretical and practical problems.



   3
     To be more precise one should specify 'of unknown size', since an accurately assessed
systematic error does not yield uncertainty, but only a correction to the raw result.
   4
     By the way, it is a good and recommended practice to provide the complete list of
contributions to the overall uncertainty [5]; but it is also clear that, at some stage, the
producer or the user of the result has to combine the uncertainty to form his idea about
the interval in which the quantity of interest is believed to lie.
   5
     And in fact, one can see that when there are only two or three contributions to the
'systematic error', there are still people who prefer to add them linearly.
             Uncertainty   in physics and the usual methods of handling it              9


 • Xi and Y should have the meaning of random variables.
 • In the case of systematic effects, how do we evaluate the input quantities
   cr(Xi) entering in the formula in a way which is consistent with their
   meaning as standard deviations?
 • How do we properly take into account correlations (assuming we have
   solved the previous questions)?


It is very interesting to go to your favorite textbook and see how 'error
propagation' is introduced. You will realize that some formulae are devel­
oped for random quantities, making use of linear approximations, and then
suddenly they are used for physics quantities without any justification.6 A
typical example is measuring a velocity v ± a(v) from a distance s ± cr(s)
and a time interval t ± a(t). It is really a challenge to go from the uncer­
tainty on s and t to that of v without considering s, t and v as random
variables, and to avoid thinking of the final result as a probabilistic state­
ment on the velocity. Also in this case, an intuitive interpretation conflicts
with standard probability theory.



1.5    Probability of observables versus probability of 'true
       values'

The criticism about the inconsistent interpretation of results may look like a
philosophical quibble, but it is, in my opinion, a crucial point which needs to
be clarified. Let us consider the example of n independent measurements
of the same quantity under identical conditions (with n large enough to
simplify the problem, and neglecting systematic effects). We can evaluate
the arithmetic average x and the standard deviation a. The well-known
result on the true value fi is


                                     H = x±-^=.                                     (1.2)


   6
    Some others, including some old lecture notes of mine, try to convince the reader
that the propagation is applied to the observables, in a very complicated and artificial
way. Then, later, as in the 'game of the three cards' proposed by professional cheaters in
the street, one uses the same formulae for physics quantities, hoping that the students
do not notice the logical gap.
10             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical      introduction


The reader will have no difficulty in admitting that the large majority of
people interpret Eq. (1.2) as if it were7


                        P(x--^=<ti<x+~)=QS%.                                        (1.3)


However, conventional statistics says only that 8


                                        X                    68
                       P(j* ~ 4= <          < V + -7=) =          % .              (1-4)


a probabilistic statement about X, given fi, a and n. Probabilistic state­
ments concerning fi are not foreseen by the theory ("/j, is a constant of
unknown value"9), although this is what we are, intuitively, looking for:
Having observed the effect x we are interested in stating something about
the possible true value responsible for it. In fact, when we do an experi­
ment, we want to increase our knowledge about /i and, consciously or not,
we want to know which values are more or less believable. A statement
concerning the probability that an observed value falls within a certain in­
terval around fi is meaningless if it cannot be turned into an expression
which states the quality of the knowledge about // itself. Since the usual
probability theory does not help, the probability inversion is performed in­
tuitively. In routine cases it usually works, but there are cases in which it
fails (see Sec. 1.7).

    7
      There are also those who express the result, making the trivial mistake of say­
ing "this means that, if I repeat the experiment a great number of times, then I will
find that in roughly 68% of the cases the observed average will be in the interval
 [x — cr/y/n, x + a/\fn\."       (Besides the interpretation problem, there is a missing fac­
tor of \/2 in the width of the interval. See Sec. 6.6 for details.)
    8
      T h e capital letter to indicate the average appearing in Eq. (1.4) is used because here
this symbol stands for a random variable, while in Eq. (1.3) it indicated numerical value
that it can assume. For the Greek symbols this distinction is not made, but the different
role should be evident from the context.
    9
      It is worth noting the paradoxical inversion of role between n, about which we are in
a state of uncertainty, considered to be a constant, and the observation x, which has a
certain value and which is instead considered a random quantity. This distorted way of
thinking produces the statements to which we are used, such as speaking of "uncertainty
 (or error) on the observed number": If one observes 10 on a sealer, there is no uncertainty
on this number, but on the quantity which we try to infer from the observation (e.g. A
of a Poisson distribution, or a rate).
              Uncertainty in physics and the usual methods of handling it                       11


1.6     Probability of t h e causes

Generally speaking, what is missing in t h e usual theory of probability is the
crucial concept of probability of hypotheses and, in particular, probability
of causes: "the essential problem of the experimental method" (Poincare):

      "I play at ecarte with a gentleman whom I know to be perfectly honest.
      What is the chance that he turns up the king? It is 1/8. This is a
      problem of the probability of effects. I play with a gentleman whom I do
      not know. He has dealt ten times, and he has turned the king up six
      times. What is the chance that he is a sharper? This is a problem in
      the probability of causes. It may be said that it is the essential problem
      of the experimental method" [8].
       "... the laws are known to us by the observed effects. Trying to deduct
      from the effects the laws which are the causes, it is solving a problem of
      probability of causes" [9].

A theory of probability which does not consider probabilities of hypothesis
is u n n a t u r a l a n d prevents t r a n s p a r e n t a n d consistent statements a b o u t the
causes which may have produced the observed effects from being assessed.


1.7     Unsuitability of frequentistic confidence intervals

According t o t h e s t a n d a r d theory of probability, statement (1.3) is non­
sense, and, in fact, good frequentistic books do not include it. They speak
instead about 'confidence intervals', which have a completely different in­
terpretation [that of Eq. (1-4)], although several books and many teachers
suggest an interpretation of these intervals as if they were probabilistic
statements on the t r u e values, like Eq. (1.3). B u t it seems to me t h a t it is
practically impossible, even for those who are fully aware of the frequentis­
tic theory, to avoid misleading conclusions. This opinion is well stated by
Howson and Urbach in a paper t o Nature [10]:

       "The statement that such-and-such is a 95% confidence interval for fi
      seems objective. But what does it say? It may be imagined that a 95%
      confidence interval corresponds to a 0.95 probability that the unknown
      parameter lies in the confidence range. But in the classical approach, p,
      is not a random variable, and so has no probability. Nevertheless, statis­
      ticians regularly say that one can be '95% confident' that the parameter
      lies in the confidence interval. They never say why."
12          Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical     introduction


                           A
                                   m v - - true
                               /              \



                            V\A
              exp. data /

                                                       —          *-
                           0                                   rriy - obs

                       Fig. 1.2      Negative neutrino mass?


The origin of the problem goes directly to the underlying concept of prob­
ability. The frequentistic concept of confidence interval is, in fact, a kind
of artificial invention to characterize the uncertainty consistently with the
frequency-based definition of probability. But, unfortunately — as a mat­
ter of fact — this attempt to classify the state of uncertainty (on the true
value) trying to avoid the concept of probability of hypotheses produces
misinterpretation. People tend to turn arbitrarily Eq. (1.4) into Eq. (1.3)
with an intuitive reasoning that I like to paraphrase as 'the dog and the
hunter': We know that a dog has a 50% probability of being 100 m from
the hunter; if we observe the dog, what can we say about the hunter? The
terms of the analogy are clear:

                            hunter 4-> true value
                                   dog -o- observable.

The intuitive and reasonable answer is "The hunter is, with 50% probability,
within 100 m of the position of the dog." But it is easy to understand that
this conclusion is based on the tacit assumption that 1) the hunter can be
anywhere around the dog; 2) the dog has no preferred direction of arrival
at the point where we observe him. Any deviation from this simple scheme
invalidates the picture on which the inversion of probability Eq. (1.4) —>
Eq. (1.3) is based. Let us look at some examples.

E x a m p l e 1: Measurement at the edge of a physical region.
       An experiment, planned to measure the electron-neutrino mass with
     a resolution of a = 2eV/c 2 (independent of the mass, for simplicity,
     see Fig. 1.2), finds a value of —4eV/c 2 (i.e. this value comes out of
     the analysis of real data treated in exactly the same way as that of
            Uncertainty   in physics and the usual methods of handling it         13




                 In f 0 (|i)


                                   1.1


                                                                V

                    f(xl|i)



                                           |iQ                 Xlfl

      Fig. 1.3   Case of highly asymmetric expectation on the physics quantity.


    simulated data, for which a 2 eV/c 2 resolution was found).
    What can we say about mvl

                                  mv = - 4 ± 2 e V / c 2 ?

                     P ( - 6 e V / c 2 < m„ < - 2 eV/c 2 ) = 68% ?

                               P(m„ < 0 eV/c 2 ) = 98% ?
    No physicist would sign a statement which sounded like he was 98%
    sure of having found a negative mass!

Example 2: Non-flat distribution of a physical quantity.
   Let us take a quantity /j, that 'we know', 10 from previous knowledge,
   to be distributed as in Fig. 1.3. It may be, for example, the energy
   of bremsstrahlung photons or of cosmic rays. We know that an ob­
   servable value X will be normally distributed around the true value //,
   independently of the value of /i. We have performed a measurement
   and obtained x = 1.1, in arbitrary units. What can we say about the
 10
    Those who make an easy use of this engaging expression are recommended to browse
Wittgenstein's "On certainty".
14           Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical     introduction




          Fig. 1.4    Hypothesis test scheme in the frequentistic approach.

     true value /i that has caused this observation? Also in this case the
     formal definition of the confidence interval does not work. Intuitively,
     we feel that there is more chance that /J, is on the left of (1.1) than
     on the right. In the jargon of the experimentalists, "there are more
      migrations from left to right than from right to left".
E x a m p l e 3: High-momentum track in a magnetic spectrometer.
     The previous examples deviate from the simple dog-hunter picture only
     because of an asymmetric possible position of the 'hunter'. The case
     of a very-high-momentum track in a central detector of a high-energy
     physics (HEP) experiment involves asymmetric response of a detector
     for almost straight tracks and non-uniform momentum distribution of
     charged particles produced in the collisions. Also in this case the simple
     inversion scheme does not work.
   To sum up the last two sections, we can say that "intuitive inversion of
probability

                     P(...<X<...)=>P{...             <M < - . . ) ,             (1-5)
besides being theoretically unjustifiable, yields results which are numerically
correct only in the case of symmetric problems." I recommend Ref. [11] to
those interested in a more detailed analysis of the many problems with (the
many variations of) standard statistical methods to compute 'confidence
intervals'.
            Uncertainty   in physics and the usual methods of handling it           15


1.8    Misunderstandings caused by the standard paradigm of
       hypothesis tests

Similar problems of interpretation appear in the usual methods used to
test hypotheses. I will briefly outline the standard procedure and then give
some examples to show the kind of paradoxical conclusions that one can
reach.
    A frequentistic hypothesis test follows the scheme outlined below (see
Fig. 1.4). u

(1) Formulate a hypothesis H0 (the 'null' hypothesis).
(2) Choose a test variable 0 of which the probability density function
    (p.d.f.) f(9 | H0) is known (analytically or numerically) for a given
    Ho-
(3) Choose an interval [#i, 62} such that there is high probability that 6
    falls inside the interval:

                                P(0i<0<02) = l - a ,                             (1-6)

    with a typically equal to 1% or 5%.
(4) Perform an experiment, obtaining 9 = 6m.
(5) Draw the following conclusions :
       • if 8\ < 6m < #2       = ^ H0 accepted;
       • otherwise             =>- Ha rejected
                                   (with a significance level a ) .

    The usual justification for the procedure is that the probability a is so
low that it is practically impossible for the test variable to fall outside the
interval. Then, if this event happens, we have good reason to reject the
hypothesis.
    One can recognize behind this reasoning a revised version of the classical
'proof by contradiction' (see, e.g., Ref. [13]). In standard dialectics, one
assumes a hypothesis to be true and looks for a logical consequence which
is manifestly false in order to reject the hypothesis. The 'slight difference'
is that in the hypothesis test scheme, the false consequence is replaced
by an improbable one. The argument may look convincing, but it has
no grounds. Moreover, since in many cases the probability of observing
a particular 'consequence' can be very small (and 'then' the hypothesis
  11
    For a short and clear introduction about meaning and historical origin of the stan­
dard hypothesis testing paradigma see Ref. [12].
16             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical      introduction




              f(0IHo)



                                          e^'-ei                       e
              Fig. 1.5   Would you accept this scheme to test hypotheses?


under test should be falsified whatever one observes), statisticians had the
brilliant idea of considering the 'probability of the tail(s)', 12 i.e. conclusions
do not depend anymore on what has been observed, but also on all non-
observed events which are considered rarer than the observed one. This
procedure seems to have solved the problem but, from the logical point
of view, is unacceptable, while, in practical applications, the perception is
that of 'something that works' (though 'by chance', as it will be discussed
in Sec. 10.8). In order to analyze the problem well, we need to review the
logic of uncertainty. For the moment a few examples are enough to indicate
that there is something troublesome behind the procedure.

E x a m p l e 4: Choosing the rejection region in the middle of the distribu­
     tion.
     Imagine choosing an interval [#i, 0jj] around the expected value of 8 (or
     around the mode) such that

                                    P{0{<0<e*2)=a,                                     (1.7)

     with a small (see Fig. 1.5). We can then reverse the test, and reject
     the hypothesis if the measured 9m is inside the interval. This strategy
     is clearly unacceptable, indicating that the rejection decision cannot be
     based on the argument of practically impossible observations (smallness
  12
     At present, 'p-values' (or 'significance probabilities') are also "used in place of hy­
pothesis tests as a means of giving more information about the relationship between the
data and the hypothesis than does a simple reject/do not reject decision" [14]. They
consist in giving the probability of the 'tail(s)', as also usually done in physics, although
the name 'p-values' has not yet entered our lexicon (to my knowledge, the first statistic
book for physicists using the term 'p-values' is Ref. [15]. Anyhow, they produce the
same interpretation problems of the hypothesis test paradigm (see also example 8 of
next section).
            Uncertainty    in physics and the usual methods of handling it            17




             Fig. 1.6     Would you accept this scheme to test hypotheses?


    of a ) .
    One may object that the reason is not only the small probability of
    the rejection region, but also its distance from the expected value. Fig­
    ure 1.6 is an example against this objection. Although the situation is
    not as extreme as that depicted in Fig. 1.5, one would need a certain
    amount of courage to say that the H0 is rejected if the test variable
    falls by chance in 'the bad region'.

E x a m p l e 5: Has the student made a mistake?
     A teacher gives to each student an individual sample of 300 random
     numbers, uniformly distributed between 0 and 1. The students are
     asked to calculate the arithmetic average. The prevision13 of the
     teacher can be quantified with

                            E P^soo] = \                                           (1.8)

                             a [X300] = A= ■ - i = = 0.017,                         (1.9)
                               L    J
                                        712 V300
    with the random variable X300 normally distributed because of the
    central limit theorem. This means that there is 99% probability that
    an average will come out in the interval 0.5 ± (2.6 x 0.017):

                             P(0.456 < X 3 0 0 < 0.544) = 99% .                   (1.10)

    Imagine that a student obtains an average outside the above interval
    (e.g. x = 0.550). The teacher may be interested in the probability that
    the student has made a mistake (for example, he has to decide if it is
  13
     By prevision [16], I mean a probabilistic 'prediction', which corresponds to what is
usually known as expectation value (see Sec. 5.2).
18            Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


     worthwhile checking the calculation in detail). Applying the standard
     methods one draws the conclusion that
        "the hypothesis H0 = 'no mistakes' is rejected at the 1 % level of
        significance",
     i.e. one receives a precise answer to a different question. In fact, the
     meaning of the previous statement is simply
        "there is only a 1% probability that the average falls outside the
        selected interval, if the calculations were done correctly".
     But this does not answer our natural question, 14 i.e. that concerning
     the probability of mistake, and not that of results far from the average if
     there were no mistakes. Moreover, the statement sounds as if one would
     be 99% sure that the student has made a mistake! This conclusion is
     highly misleading.
     If you ask the students (before they take a standard course in hypothesis
     tests) you will realize of a crucial ingredient extraneous to the logic of
     hypothesis tests:
        "It all depends on who has made the calculation!"
     In fact, if the calculation was done by a well-tested program, the prob­
     ability of mistake would be zero. And students know rather well their
     probability of making mistakes.

E x a m p l e 6: A bad joke to a journal. 15
     A scientific journal changes its publication policy. The editors announce
     that results with a significance level of 5% will no longer be accepted.
     Only those with a level of < 1% will be published. The rationale for
     the change, explained in an editorial, looks reasonable and it can be
     shared without hesitation: "We want to publish only good results."
      1000 experimental physicists, not convinced by this severe rule, con­
     spire against the journal. Each of them formulates a wrong physics
     hypothesis and performs an experiment to test it according to the ac­
     cepted/rejected scheme.
      Roughly 10 physicists get 1% significant results. Their papers are ac­
      cepted and published. It follows that, contrary to the wishes of the
  14
      Personally, I find it is somehow impolite to give an answer to a question which is
different from that asked ("What time is it?" - "My cat is sick"). At least one should
apologize for being unable to answer the original question. However, textbooks usually
do not do this, and people get confused.
   15
      Example taken from Ref. [17].
             Uncertainty in physics and the usual methods of handling it               19


      editors, the first issue of the journal under the new policy contains only
      wrong results!
      The solution to the kind of paradox raised by this example seems clear:
      The physicists knew with certainty that the hypotheses were wrong. So
      the example looks like an odd case with no practical importance. But
      in real life who knows in advance with certainty if a hypothesis is true
      or false?


1.9     Statistical significance versus probability of hypotheses

The examples in the previous section have shown the typical ways in which
significance tests are misinterpreted. This kind of mistake is commonly
made not only by students, but also by professional users of statistical
methods. There are two different probabilities playing a role:

P(H | data): the probability of the hypothesis H, conditioned by the ob­
      served data. This is the probabilistic statement in which we are in­
     terested. It summarizes the status of knowledge on H, achieved in
      conditions of uncertainty: it might be the probability that the W mass
      is between 80.00 and 80.50 GeV, that the Higgs mass is below 200 GeV,
      or that a charged track is a ir~ rather than a K~.
F ( d a t a | i J ) : the probability of the observables under the condition that
      the hypothesis H is true. 16 For example, the probability of getting two
      consecutive heads when tossing a regular coin, the probability that a W
      mass is reconstructed within 1 GeV of the true mass, or that a 2.5 GeV
      pion produces a > 100 pC signal in an electromagnetic calorimeter.

Unfortunately, conventional statistics considers only the second case. As a
consequence, since the very question of interest remains unanswered, very
often (practically always, according to ray experience) significance levels
are incorrectly treated as if they were probabilities of the hypothesis. For
example, "H refused at 5% significance" may be understood to mean the
same as "H has only 5% probability of being true."

    It is important to note the different consequences of the misunderstand­
ing caused by the arbitrary probabilistic interpretation of confidence in­
tervals and of significance levels. Measurement uncertainties on directly
  16
     This should not be confused with the probability of the actual data, which is clearly
1, since they have been observed.
20                Bayesian   reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


measured quantities obtained by confidence intervals are at least numer­
ically correct in most routine cases, although arbitrarily interpreted. In
hypothesis tests, however, the conclusions may become seriously wrong.
This can be shown with the following examples.

E x a m p l e 7: AIDS test.
     An Italian citizen is chosen at random to undergo an AIDS test. Let us
     assume that the analysis used to test for HIV infection has the following
     performances:

                                  P(Positive    | HIV) « 1,                          (1.11)
                                  P(Positive    | TTlV) = 0.2% ,                     (1.12)

          where HIV stands for "infected" and HIV for healthy. The analysis
          may declare healthy people 'Positive', even if only with a very small
          probability.
          Let us assume that the analysis states 'Positive'. Can we say that, since
          the probability of an analysis error Healthy —> Positive is only 0.2%,
          then the probability that the person is infected is 99.8%? Certainly
          not. If one calculates on the basis of an estimated 100000 infected
          persons out of a population of 60 million, there is a 55% probability
          that the person is healthy! 17 Some readers may be surprised to read
          that, in order to reach a conclusion, one needs to have an idea of how
          'reasonable' the hypothesis is, independently of the data used: a mass
          cannot be negative; the spectrum of the true value is of a certain type;
          students often make mistakes; physical hypotheses happen to be incor­
          rect; the proportion of Italians carrying the HIV virus is fortunately
          low. The notion of prior reasonableness of the hypothesis is funda­
          mental to the approach we are going to present, but it is something
          to which physicists put up strong resistance (although in practice they
          often instinctively use this intuitive way of reasoning continuously and
          correctly). In the following I will try to show that 'priors' are rational
          and unavoidable, although their influence may become negligible when
          there is strong experimental evidence in favor of a given hypothesis.

     17
    The result will be a simple application of Bayes' theorem, which will be introduced
later. A crude way to check this result is to imagine performing the test on the entire
population. Then the number of persons declared Positive will be all the HIV infected
plus 0.2% of the remaining population. In total 100 000 infected and 120 000 healthy
persons. The general, Bayesian solution is given in Sec. 3.12.1.
             Uncertainty   in physics and the usual methods of handling it                  21


E x a m p l e 8: Probabilistic statements about t h e 1997 H E R A high-Q 2
     events.
     A very instructive example of the misinterpretation of probability can
     b e found in t h e statements which commented on t h e 'excess' of events
     observed by the e-p experiments at t h e H E R A collider (DESY Labo­
     ratory, Hamburg, Germany) in the high-Q 2 region. For example, the
     official DESY statement [18] was: 1 8
        "The two HERA experiments, HI and ZEUS, observe an excess of
        events above expectations at high x (or M = ^/x~s), y, and Q2. For
        Q2 > 15000 GeV 2 the joint distribution has a probability of less than
        one per cent to come from Standard Model NC DIS processes."
     (Standard Model refers t o the most believed and successful model of
     particle physics; NC and DIS stand for Neutral Current and Deep in­
     elastic Scattering, respectively; Q2 is inversely proportional to the re­
     gion of space inside the proton probed by the electron beam.) Similar
     statements were spread out in t h e scientific community, and finally t o
     the press. For example, a message circulated by INFN stated (it can
     be understood even in Italian)
        "La probability che gli eventi osservati siano una fluttuazione statistica
        einferiore all' 1%."
     Obviously these two statements led t h e press (e.g. Corriere della Sera,
     23 Feb. 1998) to announce t h a t scientists were highly confident t h a t a
     great discovery was just around t h e corner. 1 9
     18
        One might think that the misleading meaning of that sentence was due to unfortu­
nate wording, but this possibility is ruled out by other statements which show clearly
a quite odd point of view of probabilistic matter. In fact the 1998 activity report [19]
insists that "the likelihood that the data produced are the result of a statistical fluctuation
 ...is equivalent to that of tossing a coin and throwing seven heads or tails in a row"
(replacing 'probability' by 'likelihood' does not change the sense of the message). Then,
trying to explain the meaning of a statistical fluctuation, the following example is given:
  "This process can be simulated with a die. If the number of times a die is thrown is suf­
ficiently large, the die falls equally often on all faces, i.e. all six numbers occur equally
 often. The probability for each face is exactly a sixth or 16.66%, assuming the die is not
loaded. If the die is thrown less often, then the probability curve for the distribution of
the six die values is no longer a straight line but has peaks and troughs. The probability
 distribution obtained by throwing the die varies about the theoretical value of 16.66%
 depending on how many times it is thrown."
     19
        One of the odd claims related to these events was on a poster of an INFN exhibition
at Palazzo delle Esposizioni in Rome: "These events are absolutely impossible within the
 current theory ... If they will be confirmed, it will imply that...."   Some friends of mine
who visited the exhibition asked me what it meant that "something impossible needs to
be confirmed".
22                Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


          The experiments, on the other hand, did not mention this probability.
          Their published results [20] can be summarized, more or less, as "there
          is a ;$ 1% probability of observing such events or rarer ones within the
          Standard Model".
          To sketch the flow of consecutive statements, let us indicate by SM "the
          Standard Model is the only cause which can produce these events" and
          by tail the "possible observations which are rarer than the configuration
          of data actually observed".
      (1) Experimental result: P(data + tail | SM) < 1%.
      (2) Official statements: P{SM | data) < 1%.
      (3) Press: P(SM \ data) > 99%, simply applying standard logic to the
          outcome of step 2. They deduce, correctly, that the hypothesis SM
          (= hint of new physics) is almost certain.
          One can recognize an arbitrary inversion of probability. But now there
          is also something else, which is more subtle, and suspicious: "why should
          we also take into account data which have not been observed?"20 Stated
          in a schematic way, it seems natural to draw conclusions on the basis
          of the observed data:

                                    data —> P(H | data),

          although P(H | data) differs from P(data \ H). But it appears strange
          that unobserved data should also play a role. Nevertheless, because
          of our educational background, we are so used to the tacit inferential
          scheme of the kind

                                data —> P(H \ data + tail),
          that we even have difficulty in understanding the meaning of this ob­
          jection (see Ref. [13] for an extensive discussion).

I have considered this case in detail because I was personally involved in
one of the HERA experiments. There are countless examples of this kind
of claim in the scientific community, and I am very worried when I think
that this kind of logical mistake might be applied in other fields of research
on which our health and the future of the Planet depends. Recent frontier
     20
    This is as if the conclusion from the AIDS test depended not only on
P(Positive j HIV) and on the prior probability of being infected, but also on the prob­
ability that this poor guy experienced events rarer than a mistaken analysis, like sitting
next to Claudia Schiffer on an international flight, or winning the lottery, or being hit
by a meteorite.
           Uncertainty   in physics and the usual methods of handling it      23


physics examples of misleading probabilistic claims of discovery concern the
Higgs boson ("It is a 2.6 sigma effect. So there's still a 6 in 1000 chance
that what we are seeing are background events, rather than the Higgs" [21]),
the muon magnetic moment ( "We are now 99 percent sure that the present
Standard Model cannot describe our data" [22]) and the neutrino properties
( "The experimenters reported a three-sigma discrepancy in sin2qW, which
translates to a 99.75 percent probability that the neutrinos are not behaving
like other particles" [23]).
    Since I am aware that many physicists, used the usual hypothesis test
scheme, have difficulty to realize that this kind of reasoning is wrong, let
us make finally another example, conceptually very similar to the previous
ones, but easier to understand intuitively.
Example 9: Probability that a particular random number comes from a
   generator.
   The value x — 3.01 is extracted from a Gaussian random-number gen­
   erator having /j, = 0 and a = 1. It is well known that

                                 P(\X\ > 3) = 0.27%,

    but we cannot state that the value X has 0.27% probability of coming
    from that generator, or that the probability that the observation is
    a statistical fluctuation is 0.27%. In this case, the value comes with
    100% probability from that generator, and it is at 100% a statistical
    fluctuation. This example helps to illustrate the logical mistake one can
    make in the previous examples. One may speak about the probability of
    the generator (let us call it ^4) only if another generator B is taken into
    account. If this is the case, the probability depends on the parameters
    of the generators, the observed value x and on the probability that the
    two generators enter the game. For example, if B has /J, — 6.02 and
    a = 1, it is reasonable to think that

                     P(A | x = 3.01) = P{B | x = 3.01) = 0.5 .             (1.13)

    Let us imagine a variation of the example: The generation is performed
    according to an algorithm that chooses A or B, with a ratio of proba­
    bility 10 to 1 in favor of A. The conclusions change: Given the same
    observed value x = 3.01, one would tend to infer that x is most probably
    due to A. It is not difficult to be convinced that, even if the value is a
    bit closer to the center of generator B (for example x = 3.3), there will
    still be a tendency to attribute it to A. This natural way of reasoning
24           Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


     is exactly what is meant by 'Bayesian', and will be illustrated starting
     from next chapter. It should be noted that we are only considering the
     observed data (x = 3.01 or x = 3.3), and not other values which could
     be observed (x > 3.01, for instance). This example shows also that
     we cannot simply extend the proof of contradiction from impossible to
     improbable events, as discussed in Sec. 1.8.
    I hope these examples might at least persuade the reader to take the
question of principles in probability statements seriously. Anyhow, even
if we ignore philosophical aspects, there are other kinds of more technical
inconsistencies in the way the standard paradigm is used to test hypothe­
ses. These problems, which deserve extensive discussion, are effectively
described in an interesting American Scientist article [13].
    At this point I imagine that the reader will have a very spontaneous and
legitimate objection: "but why does this scheme of hypothesis tests usually
 work?". I will comment on this question in Sec. 10.8, but first we must
introduce the alternative scheme for quantifying uncertainty.
                                    Chapter 2

                A probabilistic theory of
                measurement uncertainty


                             "If we were not ignorant there would be no probability,
                           there could only be certainty. But our ignorance cannot
                     be absolute, for then there would be no longer any probability
                            at all. Thus the problems of probability may be classed
                           according to the greater or less depth of our ignorance."
                                                                    (Henri Poincare)




2.1      W h e r e to restart from?

In the light of the criticisms made in the previous chapter, it seems clear
t h a t we would be advised t o completely revise t h e process which allows us
t o learn from experimental data. P a r a p h r a s i n g K a n t [24], one could say
t h a t (substituting the words in italics with those in parentheses):

       "All metaphysicians (physicists) are therefore solemnly and legally sus­
       pended from their occupations till they shall have answered in a satisfac­
       tory manner the question, how are synthetic cognitions a priori possible
       (is it possible to learn from observations)?"

Clearly this quotation must be taken in a playful way (at least as far as
the invitation to suspended activities is c o n c e r n e d . . . ) . But, joking apart,
the quotation is indeed more pertinent t h a n one might initially think. In
fact, Hume's criticism of t h e problem of induction, which interrupted the
'dogmatic slumber' of the great German philosopher, has survived the sub­
sequent centuries. 1 We shall come back t o this m a t t e r in a while.
   x
   For example, it is interesting to report Einstein's opinion [25] about Hume's criticism:
"Hume saw clearly that certain concepts, as for example that of causality, cannot be
deduced from the material of experience by logical methods. Kant, thoroughly convinced


                                            25
26             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical    introduction


    In order to build a theory of measurement uncertainty which does not
suffer from the problems illustrated above, we need to ground it on some
kind of first principles, and derive the rest by logic. Otherwise we replace
a collection of formulae and procedures handed down by tradition with
another collection of cooking recipes.
    We can start from two considerations.

(1) In a way which is analogous to Descartes' cogito, the only statement
    with which it is difficult not to agree — in some sense the only certainty
    — is that
         "the process of induction from experimental observations to state­
         ments about physics quantities (and, in general, physical hypothe­
         ses) is affected, unavoidably, by some degree of uncertainty".
(2) The natural concept developed by the human mind to quantify the
    plausibility of the statements in situations of uncertainty is that of
    probability.2
of the indispensability of certain concepts, took them — just as they are selected — to
be necessary premises of every kind of thinking and differentiated them from concepts of
empirical origin. I am convinced, however, that this differentiation is erroneous." In the
same Autobiographical Notes [25] Einstein, explaining how he came to the idea of the
arbitrary character of absolute time, acknowledges that "The type of critical reasoning
which was required for the discovery of this central point was decisively furthered, in
my case, especially by the reading of David Hume's and Ernst Mach's philosophical
writings." This tribute to Mach and Hume is repeated in the 'gemeinverstandlich' of
special relativity [26]: "Why is it necessary to drag down from the Olympian fields of
Plato the fundamental ideas of thought in natural science, and to attempt to reveal their
earthly lineage? Answer: In order to free these ideas from the taboo attached to them,
and thus to achieve greater freedom in the formation of ideas or concepts. It is to the
immortal credit of D. Hume and E. Mach that they, above all others, introduced this
critical conception." I would like to end this parenthesis dedicated to Hume with a last
citation, this time by de Finetti[16], closer to the argument of this chapter: "In the
philosophical arena, the problem of induction, its meaning, use and justification, has
given rise to endless controversy, which, in the absence of an appropriate probabilistic
framework, has inevitably been fruitless, leaving the major issues unresolved. It seems
to me that the question was correctly formulated by Hume ... and the pragmatists
 ... However, the forces of reaction are always poised, armed with religious zeal, to
 defend holy obtuseness against the possibility of intelligent clarification. No sooner had
Hume begun to prise apart the traditional edifice, then came poor Kant in a desperate
 attempt to paper over the cracks and contain the inductive argument — like its deductive
 counterpart — firmly within the narrow confines of the logic of certainty."
     2
    Perhaps one may try to use instead fuzzy logic or something similar. I will only
try to show that this way is productive and leads to a consistent theory of uncertainty
which does not need continuous injections of extraneous matter. I am not interested in
demonstrating the uniqueness of this solution, and all contributions on the subject are
welcome.
                    A probabilistic theory of measurement uncertainty                  27


In other words we need to build a probabilistic (probabilistic and not, gener-
ically, statistic) theory of measurement uncertainty.
    These two starting points seem perfectly reasonable, although the sec­
ond appears to contradict the criticisms of the probabilistic interpretation
of the result, raised in Sections 1.4 and 1.5. However this is not really a
problem, it is only a product of a distorted (i.e. different from the natural)
view of the concept of probability. So, first we have to review the concept
of probability. Once we have clarified this point, all the applications in
measurement uncertainty will follow and there will be no need to inject
ad hoc methods or use magic formulae, supported by authority but not by
logic.



2.2     C o n c e p t s of p r o b a b i l i t y

We have arrived at the point where it is necessary to define better what
probability is. This is done in Chapter 3. As a general comment on the
different approaches to probability, I would like, following Ref. [27], to cite
de Finetti[16]:

       "The only relevant thing is uncertainty - the extent of our knowledge
      and ignorance. The actual fact of whether or not the events considered
      are in some sense determined, or known by other people, and so on, is of
      no consequence.
      The numerous, different opposed attempts to put forward particular
      points of view which, in the opinion of their supporters, would endow
      Probability Theory with a 'nobler status', or a 'more scientific' charac­
      ter, or 'firmer' philosophical or logical foundations, have only served to
      generate confusion and obscurity, and to provoke well-known polemics
      and disagreements - even between supporters of essentially the same
      framework.
      The main points of view that have been put forward are as follows.
      The classical view is based on physical considerations of symmetry, in
      which one should be obliged to give the same probability to such 'sym­
      metric' cases. But which 'symmetry'?         And, in any case, why? The
      original sentence becomes meaningful if reversed: the symmetry is prob­
      abilistically significant, in someone's opinion, if it leads him to assign the
      same probabilities to such events.
      The logical view is similar, but much more superficial and irresponsible
      inasmuch as it is based on similarities or symmetries which no longer de­
      rive from the facts and their actual properties, but merely from sentences
      which describe them, and their formal structure or language.
      The frequentistic (or statistical) view presupposes that one accepts the
28            Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical introduction


     classical view, in that it considers an event as a class of individual events,
     the latter being 'trials' of the former. The individual events not only have
     to be 'equally probable', but also 'stochastically independent' ... (these
     notions when applied to individual events are virtually impossible to
     define or explain in terms of the frequentistic interpretation).       In this
     case, also, it is straightforward, by means of the subjective approach,
     to obtain, under the appropriate conditions, in perfectly valid manner,
     the result aimed at (but unattainable) in the statistical formulation. It
     suffices to make use of the notion of exchangeability. The result, which
     acts as a bridge connecting the new approach to the old, has often been
     referred to by the objectivists as "de Finetti's representation theorem."

     It follows that all the three proposed definitions of 'objective' probability,
     although useless per se, turn out to be useful and good as valid auxiliary
     devices when included as such in the subjectivist theory."

Also interesting is Hume's point of view on probability, where concept and
evaluations are neatly separated. Note t h a t these words were written in
the middle of the 18th century [28].

      "Though there be no such thing as Chance in the world; our ignorance of
     the real cause of any event has the same influence on the understanding,
     and begets a like species of belief or opinion.
     There is certainly a probability, which arises from a superiority of chances
     on any side; and according as this superiority increases, and surpasses
     the opposite chances, the probability receives a proportionable increase,
     and begets still a higher degree of belief or assent to that side, in which
     we discover the superiority. If a dye were marked with one figure or
     number of spots on four sides, and with another figure or number of
     spots on the two remaining sides, it would be more probable, that the
     former would turn up than the latter; though, if it had a thousand sides
     marked in the same manner, and only one side different, the probability
     would be much higher, and our belief or expectation of the event more
     steady and secure. This process of the thought or reasoning may seem
     trivial and obvious; but to those who consider it more narrowly, it may,
     perhaps, afford matter for curious speculation.

     Being determined by custom to transfer the past to the future, in all
     our inferences; where the past has been entirely regular and uniform,
     we expect the event with the greatest assurance, and leave no room for
     any contrary supposition. But where different effects have been found
     to follow from causes, which are to appearance exactly similar, all these
     various effects must occur to the mind in transferring the past to the
     future, and enter into our consideration, when we determine the prob-
                  A probabilistic theory of measurement uncertainty                  29


       ability of the event. Though we give the preference to that which has
       been found most usual, and believe that this effect will exist, we must
       not overlook the other effects, but must assign to each of them a partic­
       ular weight and authority, in proportion as we have found it to be more
       or less frequent."



2.3      Subjective probability

I would like to sketch the essential concepts related to subjective proba­
bility, 3 for the convenience of those who wish to have a short overview of
the subject, discussed in detail in P a r t 2. This should also help those who
are not familiar with this approach t o follow the scheme of probabilistic
induction which will be presented in the next section, and the summary of
the applications which will be developed in the rest of this text.

  • Essentially, one assumes t h a t the concept of probability is primitive,
    i.e. close t o t h a t of common sense (said with a joke, probability is
    what everybody knows before going to school and continues to use
    afterwards, in spite of what one has been t a u g h t 4 ) .
  • Stated in other words, probability is a measure of the degree of belief
    that an event will occur.
  • Probability is related to the state of uncertainty, and not (only) to the
    outcome of repeated experiments.
  • The value of probability ranges between 0 and 1 from events which go
    from false to t r u e (see Fig. 3.1 in Sec. 3.2).
  • Since the more one believes in an event the more money one is prepared
    to bet, the 'coherent' bet can be used to define the value of probability
    in an operational way (see Sec. 3.2).
  • From the condition of coherence one obtains, as theorems, the basic
    rules of probability (usually known as axioms) and the 'formula of con­
    ditional probability' (see Sees. 3.5.2, and 10.3 for further clarifications).
  • There is, in principle, an infinite number of ways to evaluate the prob­
    ability, with the only condition being t h a t they must satisfy coherence.
    We can use symmetry arguments, statistical d a t a (past frequencies),
    Monte Carlo simulations, q u a n t u m mechanics 5 and so on. W h a t is im-
   3
      For an introductory and concise presentation of the subject see also Ref. [29].
   4
      This remark — not completely a joke — is due to the observation that most physi­
cists interviewed are convinced that Eq. (1.3) is legitimate, although they maintain that
probability is the limit of the frequency (see more details in Ref. [30]).
    5
      Without entering into the open problems of quantum mechanics, let us just say
30              Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical     introduction


     portant is that if we get a number close to one, we are very confident
     that the event will happen; if the number is close to zero we are very
     confident that it will not happen; if P(A) > P(B), then we believe in
     the realization of A more than in the realization of B.
     It is easy to show that the usual 'definitions' suffer from circularity
     (Sec. 3.1), and that they can be used only in very simple and stereo­
     typical cases. For example, it is remarkable Poincare's criticism [8]
     concerning the combinatorial definition:
         "The definition, it will be said, is very simple. The probability of
        an event is the ratio of the number of cases favorable to the event
        to the total number of possible cases. A simple example will show
        how incomplete this definition is: ...
        ... We are therefore bound to complete the definition by saying
         '... to the total number of possible cases, provided the cases are
        equally probable.' So we are compelled to define the probable by
        the probable. How can we know that two possible cases are equally
        probable? Will it be by convention? If we insert at the beginning
        of every problem an explicit convention, well and good! We then
        have nothing to do but to apply the rules of arithmetic and algebra,
        and we complete our calculation, when our result cannot be called
        in question. But if we wish to make the slightest application of
        this result, we must prove that our convention is legitimate, and
        we shall find ourselves in the presence of the very difficulty we
        thought we had avoided."
     In the subjective approach these 'definitions' can be easily recovered
     as 'evaluation rules' under appropriate conditions. As far as the com­
     binatorial evaluation is concerned, the reason is quite intuitive and it
     is already contained in the original Laplace's 'Laplace definition' (see
     Sec. 3.1). The frequency based evaluation will be reobtained in Sec. 7.1.
     Subjective probability becomes the most general framework, which is
     valid in all practical situations and, particularly, in treating uncertainty
     in measurements.
     Subjective probability does not mean arbitrary 6 ; on the contrary, since
that it does not matter, from the cognitive point of view, whether one believes that the
fundamental laws are intrinsically probabilistic, or whether this is just due to a limitation
of our knowledge, as hidden variables a la Einstein would imply. [31, 32] If we calculate
that process A has a probability of 0.9, and process B 0.4, we will believe A much more
than B.
   6
     Perhaps this is the reason why Poincare[8], despite his many brilliant intuitions,
                 A probabilistic theory of measurement    uncertainty                 31


   the normative role of coherence morally obliges a person who assesses
   a probability to take personal responsibility, he will try to act in the
   'most objective way' (as perceived by common sense).
 • The word 'belief can hurt those who think, naively, that in science
   there is no place for beliefs. This point will be discussed in more detail
   in Sec. 10.4 (see also Ref. [33], while a more extensive and historical
   account can be found in Ref. [34]).
 • Objectivity is recovered if rational individuals share the same culture
   and the same knowledge about experimental data, as happens for most
   textbook physics; but one should speak, more appropriately, of inter-
   subjectivity.
 • The utility of subjective probability in measurement uncertainty has
   already been recognized7 by the aforementioned ISO Guide [5], after
   many internal discussions [35] (see Ref. [36] and references therein):
        "In contrast to this frequency-based point of view of probability an
        equally valid viewpoint is that probability is a measure of the degree of
        belief that an event will occur... Recommendation INC-1... implicitly
        adopts such a viewpoint of probability."
  • In the subjective approach random variables (or, better, uncertain num­
    bers) assume a more general meaning than that they have in the fre-
    quentistic approach: a random number is just any number in respect
    of which one is in a condition of uncertainty. For example:
   (1) if I put a reference weight (1 kg) on a balance with digital in­
       dication to the centigramme, then the random variable is the
       value (in grammes) that I am expected to read (X): 1000.00,
       999.95... 1000.03...?
   (2) if I put a weight of unknown value and I read 576.23 g, then the ran­
       dom value (in grammes) becomes the mass of the body (/x): 576.10,
       576.12...576.23 ...576.50...?
above all about the necessity of the priors ("there are certain points which seem to
be well established. To undertake the calculation of any probability, and even for that
calculation to have any meaning at all, we must admit, as a point of departure, a
hypothesis or convention which has always something arbitrary on it ...), concludes to
 "... have set several problems, and have given no solution ...". The coherence makes the
distinction between arbitrariness and 'subjectivity' and gives a real sense to subjective
probability.
     7
       One should not feel obliged to follow this recommendation as a metrology rule. It
is however remarkable to hear that, in spite of the diffused cultural prejudices against
subjective probability, the scientists of the ISO working groups have arrived at such a
conclusion.
32             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


   In the first case the random number is linked to observations, in the
   second to true values.
 • The different values of the random variable are classified by a function
   f(x) which quantifies the degree of belief of all the possible values of
   the quantity.
 • All the formal properties of f(x) are the same as in conventional statis­
   tics (average, variance, etc.).
 • All probability distributions are conditioned to a given state of informa­
   tion: in the examples of the balance one should write, more correctly,

                              f(x) —»• f(x | fi = 1000.00)
                              /(/*) —► /(/i I x = 576.23).

     • Of particular interest is the special meaning of conditional probabil­
       ity within the framework of subjective probability. Also in this case
       this concept turns out to be very natural, and the subjective point of
       view solves some paradoxes of the so-called 'definition' of conditional
       probability (see Sec. 10.3).
     • The subjective approach is often called Bayesian, because of the central
       role of Bayes' theorem, which will be introduced in Sec. 2.6. However,
       although Bayes' theorem is important, especially in scientific applica­
       tions, one should not think that this is the only way to evaluate prob­
       abilities. Outside the well-specified conditions in which it is valid, the
       only guidance is that of coherence.
     • Considering the result of a measurement, the entire state of uncer­
       tainty is held in f(fi); then one may calculate intervals in which we
       think there is a given probability to find n, value(s) of maximum belief
       (mode), average, standard deviation, etc., which allow the result to be
       summarized with only a couple of numbers, chosen in a conventional
       way.


2.4      Learning from observations: the 'problem of induction'

Having briefly shown the language for treating uncertainty in a probabilistic
way, it remains now to see how one builds the function /(/z) which describes
the beliefs in the different possible values of the physics quantity. Before
presenting the formal framework we still need a short introduction on the
link between observations and hypotheses.
    Every measurement is made with the purpose of increasing the knowl-
                 A probabilistic theory of measurement      uncertainty                  33


edge of the person who performs it, and of anybody else who may be inter­
ested in it. This may be the members of a scientific community, a physician
who has prescribed a certain analysis or a merchant who wants to buy a
certain product. It is clear that the need to perform a measurement indi­
cates that one is in a state of uncertainty with respect to something, e.g.
a fundamental constant of physics or a theory of the Universe; the state
of health of a patient; the chemical composition of a product. In all cases,
the measurement has the purpose of modifying a given state of knowledge.
One would be tempted to say 'acquire', instead of 'modify', the state of
knowledge, thus indicating that the knowledge could be created from noth­
ing with the act of the measurement. Instead, it is not difficult to realize
that, in all cases, it is just an updating process, in the light of new facts
and of some reason.
    Let us take the example of the measurement of the temperature in a
room, using a digital thermometer — just to avoid uncertainties in the
reading — and let us suppose that we get 21.7 °C. Although we may be
uncertain on the tenths of a degree, there is no doubt that the measurement
will have squeezed the interval of temperatures considered to be possible
before the measurement: those compatible with the physiological feeling of
'comfortable environment'. According to our knowledge of the thermometer
used, or of thermometers in general, there will be values of temperature in
a given interval around 21.7°C which we believe more and values outside
which we believe less.8 It is, however, also clear that if the thermometer
had indicated, for the same physiological feeling, 17.3°C, we might think
that it was not well calibrated. There would be, however, no doubt that the
instrument was not working properly if it had indicated 2.5 °C! The three
cases correspond to three different degrees of modification of the knowledge.
In particular, in the last case the modification is null.9
   The process of learning from empirical observations is called induction
by philosophers. Most readers will be aware that in philosophy there exists
the unsolved 'problem of induction', raised by Hume. His criticism can be
summarized by simply saying that induction is not justified, in the sense
that observations do not lead necessarily (with the logical strength of a
mathematical theorem) to certain conclusions. The probabilistic approach

      To understand the role of implicit prior knowledge, imagine someone having no
scientific or technical education at all, entering a physics laboratory and reading a number
on an instrument. His scientific knowledge will not improve at all, apart from the
triviality that a given instrument displayed a number (not much knowledge).
    9
      But also in this case we have learned something: the thermometer does not work.
34                  Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical    introduction


adopted here seems to be the only reasonable way out of such a criticism.


2.5         Beyond Popper's falsification scheme

People very often think that the only scientific method valid in physics is
that of Popper's falsification scheme. There is no doubt that, if a theory
is not capable of explaining experimental results, it should be rejected or
modified. But, since it is impossible to demonstrate with certainty that a
theory is true, it becomes impossible to decide among the infinite number of
hypotheses which have not been falsified. Adopting the falsification method
literally would produce stagnation in research. A probabilistic method
allows, instead, for a scale of credibility to be provided for classifying all
hypotheses taken into account (or credibility ratios between any pair of
hypotheses). This is close to the natural development of science, where
new investigations are made in the direction which seems the most credible,
according to the state of knowledge at the moment at which the decision
on how to proceed was made.
    As far as the results of measurements are concerned, the falsification
scheme is absolutely unsuitable. Taking it literally, one should be autho­
rized only to check whether or not the value read on an instrument is com­
patible with a true value, nothing more. It is understandable then that,
with this premise, one cannot go very far.
    We will show in Sec. 3.8 that falsification is just a subcase of the
Bayesian inference.


2.6          From the probability of the effects to the probability of
             the causes

The scheme of updating knowledge that we will use is that of Bayesian
statistical inference, widely discussed in Part 2 (in particular Sees. 3.5 and
5.1.1). I wish to make a less formal presentation of it here, to show that
there is nothing mysterious behind Bayes' theorem, and I will try to justify
it in a simple way.
    It is very convenient to consider true values and observed values as
causes and effects (see Fig. 2.1, imagining also a continuous set of causes
and many possible effects). The process of going from causes to effects
is called 'deduction'. 10 The possible values x which may be observed are
     10
          To be correct, the deduction we are talking about is different from the classical one.
                 A probabilistic theory of measurement      uncertainty                 35




                 causes



            deduction                                              induction
                                                                / (inference)




                       effect


                          Fig. 2.1   Deduction and induction.


classified in belief by

                                        /MM).
This function is traditionally called 'likelihood' and summarizes all previous
knowledge on that kind of measurement (behavior of the instruments, of
influence factors, etc. - see list in Sec. 1.3). Often, if one deals only
with random error, the f(x | /x) is a Gaussian distribution around fj,, but in
principle it may have any form.
     Once the likelihood is determined (in other words, we have modelled the
performance of the detector) we can build f(/j,\x), under the hypothesis
that x will be observed.11 In order to arrive at the general formula in an
heuristic way, let us consider only two values of \i. If they seem to us equally
possible, it will seem natural to be in favor of the value which gives the
highest likelihood that x will be observed. For example, assuming \i\ = —1,
/X2 = 10, considering a normal likelihood with a = 3, and having observed
x = 2, one tends to believe that the observation is most likely caused by
/ii. If, on the other hand, the quantity of interest is positively defined, then
Hi switches from most probable to impossible cause; fi2 becomes certain.
We are dealing, in fact, with probabilistic deduction, in the sense that, given a certain
cause, the effect is not univocally determined.
  11
     It is important to understand that / ( / i | x) can be evaluated before one knows the
observed value x. In fact, to be correct, f(fi | x) should be interpreted as beliefs of n
under the hypothesis that x is observed, and not only as beliefs of /J, after x is observed.
Similarly, f(x | fi) can also be built after the data have been observed, although for
teaching purposes the opposite has been suggested.
36                 Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


There are, in general, intermediate cases in which, because of previous
knowledge (see, e.g., Fig. 1.3 and related text), one tends to believe a
priori more in one or other of the causes. It follows that, in the light of a
new observation, the degree of belief of a given value of \x will depend on

 - the likelihood that /i will produce the observed effect;
 - the degree of belief attributed to fi before the observation, quantified
          by   f0(n).

Assuming12 linear dependence on each contribution, we have finally13:

                                  f{n\x)   oc/(x|/x)/o(/x).

This is one of the ways to write Bayes' theorem.


2.7        Bayes' theorem for uncertain quantities:                      derivation
           from a physicist's point of view

Let us show a little more formally the concepts illustrated in the previous
section. This is a proof of the Bayes' theorem alternative to the proof
applied to events, given in Part 2. It is now applied directly to uncertain
quantities, and it should be closer to the physicist's reasoning than the
standard proof. For teaching purposes I explain it using time ordering, but
this is unnecessary, as it will be explained in Part 2.

     • Before doing the experiment we are uncertain of the values of /J and
       x: we know neither the true value, nor the observed value. Generally
       speaking, this uncertainty is quantified by f(x,fi).
     • Under the hypothesis that we observe x, we can calculate the condi­
       tional probability


                                             f(x)       //(z^d/j '

          just using probability rules (see Chapter 4 for a reminder - note the
          convention that the limit of integrals are omitted if they extend to all
          possible values of the variable of interest).
     12
    Bayes' theorem will show that this assumption is indeed correct.
     13
    Note the use of the same symbol / ( ) for all p.d.f.'s, though they refer to different
quantities, with different status of information, and have different mathematical expres­
sions.
                 A probabilistic theory of measurement    uncertainty         37


      Usually we don't have f(x,/j,),     but this can be calculated by   f(x\fi)
      and /(//):

                                f(x,n)   =       f(x\n)f(fi).

      If we do an experiment we need to have a good idea of the behavior
      of the apparatus; therefore f(x | /x) must be a narrow distribution, and
      the most imprecise factor remains the knowledge about /i, quantified
      by /(/x), usually very broad. But it is all right that this should be so,
      because we want to learn about \x.
      Putting all the pieces together we get the standard formula of Bayes'
      theorem for uncertain quantities:


                                          ff(x\rif(n)dp
The steps followed in this proof of the theorem should convince the reader
that f(n\x) calculated in this way is the best we can say about /x with the
given status of information.


2.8     Afraid of 'prejudices'? Logical necessity versus fre­
        quent practical irrelevance of the priors

Doubtless, many readers could be at a loss at having to accept that scientific
conclusions may depend on prejudices about the value of a physical quantity
('prejudice' currently has a negative meaning, but in reality it simply means
'scientific judgement based on previous experience'). We shall have many
opportunities to enter again into discussion about this problem, but it is
important to give a general overview now and to make some firm statements
on the role of priors.

 • First, from a theoretical point of view, it is impossible to get rid of pri­
   ors; that is if we want to calculate the probability of events of practical
   interest, and not just solve mathematical games.
 • At a more intuitive level, it is absolutely reasonable to draw conclusions
   in the light of some reason, rather than in a purely automatic way.
 • In routine measurements the interval of prior acceptance of the possible
   values is so large, compared to the width of the likelihood (seen as
   a function of /x), that, in practice, it is as if all values were equally
38            Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


     possible. T h e prior is then absorbed into the normalization constant:


                     /(s|/x)/„(/*) —                >f(x\n).                   (2.1)
                                   prior very vague

 • If, instead, this is not the case, it is legitimate t h a t the priors influ­
   ence our conclusions. In the most extreme case, if the experimental
   information is scarce or doubtful it is absolutely right to believe more
   in personal prejudices t h a n in empirical data. This could be when one
   uses an instrument of which one is not very confident, or when one does
   for the first time measurements in a new field, or in a new kinematical
   domain, and so on. For example, it is easier t o believe t h a t a student
   has made a trivial mistake t h a n to conceive t h a t he has discovered a
   new physical effect. An interesting case is mentioned by Poincare[8]:

         "The impossibility of squaring the circle was shown in 1885, but before
        that date all geometers considered this impossibility as so 'probable'
        that the Academie des Sciences rejected without examination the, alas!
        too numerous memoirs on this subject that a few unhappy madmen
        sent in every year. Was the Academie wrong? Evidently not, and it
        knew perfectly well that by acting in this manner it did not run the
        least risk of stifling a discovery of moment. The Academie could not
        have proved that it was right, but it knew quite well that its instinct
        did not deceive it. If you had asked the Academicians, they would
        have answered: 'We have compared the probability that an unknown
        scientist should have found out what has been vainly sought for so
        long, with the probability that there is one madman the more on the
        earth, and the latter has appeared to us the greater.'"


    In conclusion, contrary t o those who t r y to find 'objective priors' which
would give the Bayesian theory a nobler status of objectivity, I prefer t o
state explicitly the naturalness and necessity of subjective priors [33]. If
rational people (e.g. physicists), under the guidance of coherence (i.e. they
are honest, first of all with themselves), but each with unavoidable personal
experience, have priors which are so different t h a t they reach divergent
conclusions, it just means t h a t the d a t a are still not sufficiently solid to
allow a high degree of intersubjectivity (i.e. the subject is still in the area
of active research rather t h a n in t h a t of consolidated scientific culture). On
the other hand, the step from abstract objective rules to dogmatism is very
short [33].
                 A probabilistic theory of measurement     uncertainty                 39


    Turning now to the more practical aspect of presenting a result, I will
give some recommendations about unbiased ways of doing this, in cases
when priors are really critical (Chapter 13). Nevertheless, it should be
clear that:

 • since the natural conclusions should be probabilistic statements on
   physical quantities, someone has to turn the likelihoods into proba­
   bilities, and those who have done the experiment are usually the best
   candidates for doing this;
 • taking the spirit of publishing unbiased results — which is in principle
   respectable — to extremes, one should not publish any result, but just
   raw data tapes.


2.9    Recovering standard              methods          and   short-cuts       to
       Bayesian reasoning

Before moving on to applications, it is necessary to answer an important
question: "Should one proceed by applying Bayes' theorem in every situ­
ation?" The answer is no, and the alternative is essentially implicit in
Eq. (2.1), and can be paraphrased with the example of the dog and the
hunter of Sec. 1.7, when we discussed the arbitrariness of probability inver­
sion performed unconsciously by (most of) 14 those who use the scheme of
confidence intervals. The same example will also be used in Sec. 5.3, when
discussing the reason why Bayesian estimators appear to be distorted (a
topic discussed in more detail in Sec. 10.6). This analogy is very impor­
tant, and, in many practical applications, it allows us to bypass the explicit
use of Bayes' theorem when priors do not influence significantly the result
(in the case of a normal model the demonstration can be seen in Sec. 6.3).
    Figure 2.2 shows how it is possible to recover standard methods from a
Bayesian perspective. One sees that the crucial link is with the Maximum
Likelihood Principle, which, in this approach is just a subcase (see Sees. 5.2
and 8.1). Then, when extra simplifying restrictions are verified, the different
forms of the Least Squares are reobtained. In conclusion:

  • One is allowed to use these methods if one thinks that the approx­
    imations are valid; the same happens with the usual propagation of
  14
    Although I don't believe it, I leave open the possibility that there really is someone
who has developed some special reasoning to avoid, deep in his mind, the category of
the probable when figuring out the uncertainty on a true value.
40               Bayesian   reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction



                            Data                              Priors




                                    Bayesian Inference


                                                  If insensitivity     O priors very        vague
                                                  from priors               and/or
                                                                       O many        data

     /   Principle
 /          of                     Maximum Likelihood
     Max. Likelihood/


                                                 - normality


                                     min{x2 = ATV-lA}


                                                    - multinomial
                                                                            Pearson x 2
                                                    -Nthj "large"
                                                                             ("i-Nthj)2
                                                                       2;
                                                  independence                   Nthi




                                                   all Oj are the same




Fig. 2.2 Relation between Bayesian inference and standard data analysis methods. The
top-down flow shows subsequent limiting conditions. For an understanding of the relation
between the 'normal' \ 2 a n d the Pearson x 2 Ref- [37] is recommended. Details are given
in Chapter 8.
               A probabilistic theory of measurement     uncertainty               41


   uncertainties and of their correlations, outlined in the next section.
   One keeps the Bayesian interpretation of the results; in particular, one
   is allowed to talk about the probability distributions of the true values,
   with philosophical and practical advantages.
   Even if the priors are not negligible, but the final distribution is roughly
   normal (in case of doubt it is recommended to plot it). One can eval­
   uate the expected value and standard deviation from the shape of the
   distribution, as is well known:
                           <91n/(/z la;)     „   _, ,                            ,„ „.
                               MMI     ;
                                           = 0 => E(fi) « fim,                    (2.2)
                          d2lnf(n\x)                      1
                                                                                 (2-3)
                              dtf                      Var(fi)
    where fim stands for the mode of the distribution. When the prior
    is very vague the conditions on the derivatives apply to f(x\fi), thus
    recovering, once more, standard methods. Examples of application are
    shown in Sees. 7.1, 7.7.2 and 8.2.


2.10     Evaluation    of measurement            uncertainty:          general
         scheme

Now that we have set up the framework, we can draw the general scheme
to evaluate uncertainty in measurement in the most general cases. For
the basic applications we will refer to Parts II (the "primer") and III. For
more sophisticated applications the reader is recommended to search in
specialized literature.


2.10.1    Direct measurement         in the absence of systematic          er­
          rors
The first step consists in evaluating the uncertainty on a quantity measured
directly. The most common likelihoods which describe the observed values
are the Gaussian, the binomial and the Poisson distributions.

Gaussian: This is the well-known case of 'normally' distributed errors.
   For simplicity, we will only consider a independent of /x (constant r.m.s.
   error within the range of measurability), but there is no difficulty of
   principle in treating the general case. The following cases will be ana­
   lyzed:
42          Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


     • inference on \i starting from a prior much more vague than the width
       of the likelihood (Sec. 6.2);
     • prior width comparable with that of the likelihood (Sec. 6.3): this
       case also describes the combination of independent measurements;
     • observed values very close to, or beyond the edge of the physical
       region (Sec. 6.7);
Binomial: This distribution is important for efficiencies and, in the gen­
   eral case, for making inferences on unknown proportions. The cases
   considered include (see Sec. 7.1):
     • general case with flat prior leading to the recursive Laplace formula
       (the problem solved originally by Bayes);
     • limit to normality;
     • combinations of different datasets coming from the same proportion;
     • upper and lower limits when the efficiency is 0 or 1;
     • comparison with Poisson approximation.
Poisson: The cases of counting experiments here considered:
     • inference on A starting from a flat distribution;
     • upper limit in the case of null observation;
     • counting measurements in the presence of a background, when the
       background rate is well known (Sec. 7.7.5);
     • more complicated case of background with an uncertain rate
       (Sec. 7.7.5);
     • dependence of the conclusions on the choice of experience-motivated
       priors (Sec. 7.7.1);
     • combination of upper limits, also considering experiments of differ­
       ent sensitivity (Sec. 7.7.3).
     • effect of possible systematic errors (Sec. 7.7.4);


2.10.2   Indirect          measurements
The case of quantities measured indirectly is conceptually very easy, as there
is 'nothing to think'. Since all values of the quantities are associated with
random numbers, the uncertainty on the input quantities is propagated to
that of output quantities, making use of the rules of probability. Calling
fix, fi2 and nz the generic quantities, the inferential scheme is:

               fi^ldata,)                     +f{^\dataudata2).              (2.4)
               J[fi2 I a a t 0 2 j   ^3=3(^1,^2)
                 A probabilistic theory of measurement     uncertainty                  43


The problem of going from the p.d.f.'s of fix and fi2 to that of JJLZ makes
use of probability calculus, which can become difficult, or impossible to do
analytically, if p.d.f.'s or g(/ii,/*2) are complicated mathematical functions.
Anyhow, it is interesting to note that the solution to the problem is, indeed,
simple, at least in principle. In fact, /(/i3) is given, in the most general
case, by

               /(A*3) = / / ( w ) / ( ^ 2 ) <%3 -ff(/ii,/i 2 ))d/iid/i 2 ,          (2.5)

where SQ is the Dirac delta and the integration is over all possible values
of /ii and H2- The formula can be easily extended to many variables, or
even correlations can be taken into account (one needs only to replace the
product of individual p.d.f.'s by a joint p.d.f.). Equation (2.5) has a simple
intuitive interpretation: the infinitesimal probability element }{nz) dptz de­
pends on 'how many' (we are dealing with infinities!) elements d\i\dni con­
tribute to it, each weighed with the p.d.f. calculated in the point     {[ii,^}.
An alternative interpretation of Eq. (2.5), very useful in applications, is
to think of a Monte Carlo simulation, where all possible values of /ii and
H2 enter with their distributions, and correlations are properly taken into
account. The histogram of Hz calculated from /X3 = g(/j,i,fi2) will 'tend' to
/(/X3) for a large number of generated events. 15
    In routine cases the propagation is done in an approximate way, assum­
ing linearization of g(ni,fi2) and normal distribution of fi3. Therefore only
variances and covariances need to be calculated. The well-known error prop­
agation formulae are recovered (Chapter 8), but now with a well-defined
probabilistic meaning.


2.10.3     Systematic        errors
Uncertainty due to systematic effects is also included in a natural way in
this approach. Let us first define the notation (i is the generic index):

  • x = {x\, X2, ■ ■ ■ xnx} is the 'n-tuple' (vector) of observables X»;
  • li = {fii,fi2, ■ ■ ■ A*nj,} is the n-tuple of true values fif,
  • h = {hi, /12, • • • hnh} is the n-tuple of influence quantities Hi.
   15
      As we shall see, the use of frequencies is absolutely legitimate in subjective proba­
bility, once the distinction between probability and frequency is properly made. In this
case it works because of the Bernoulli theorem, which states that for a very large Monte
Carlo sample "it is very improbable that the frequency distribution will differ much from
the p.d.f." (This is the probabilistic meaning to be attributed to 'tend'.)
44            Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical      introduction


By influence quantities we mean:
—>■ all kinds of external factors which may influence the result (tempera­
   ture, atmospheric pressure, etc.);
—> all calibration constants;
—► all possible hypotheses upon which the results may depend (e.g. Monte
   Carlo parameters).
From a probabilistic point of view, there is no distinction between /z and
h: they are all conditional hypotheses for the x, i.e. causes which produce
the observed effects. The difference is simply that we are interested in [i
rather than in h.16
    There are alternative ways to take into account the systematic effects
in the final distribution of /i.:
(1) Global inference on f(fi,h).     We can use Bayes' theorem to make an
    inference on /i, and h, as described in Sec. 5.1.1. A subsequent marginal-
    ization over h yields the p.d.f. of interest:

                             x => f(fi,h\x)     =>      f(fi\x).

    This method, depending on the joint prior distribution f0(fj,,h), can
    even model possible correlations between fj, and h.
(2) Conditional inference (see Fig. 2.3). Given the observed data, one has
    a joint distribution of \i for all possible configurations of h:

                                    x =>•      f(/i\x,h).

     Each conditional result is reweighed with the distribution of beliefs of
     h, using the well-known law of probability:

                           f(v\x) = Jf(n\x,h)f(h)dh.                              (2.6)

(3) Propagation of uncertainties. Essentially, one applies the propagation
    of uncertainty, whose most general case has been illustrated in the
   16
      For example, in the absence of random error the reading (X) of a voltmeter depends
on the probed voltage (V) and on the scale offset (Z): X = V — Z. Therefore, the result
from the observation of X = x gives only a constraint between V and Z:

                                      V - Z = x.

If we know Z well (within unavoidable uncertainty), then we can learn something about
V. If instead the prior knowledge on V is better than that on Z we can use the mea­
surement to calibrate the instrument.
                A probabilistic theory of measurement       uncertainty            45


                                          f(tfx0)

                f(fi\x0,h)




                                 Xr                                       X


Fig. 2.3 Model to handle the uncertainty due to systematic errors by the use of condi­
tional probability.

    previous section, making use of the following model: One considers a
    'raw result' on raw values iiR for some nominal values of the influence
    quantities, i.e.

                                       f(fiR\x,h0);

    then (corrected) true values are obtained as a function of the raw ones
    and of the possible values of the influence quantities, i.e.

                                      Mi =     Vi{HiR,h),
    and f(n) is evaluated by probability rules.
The three ways lead to the same result and each of them can be more
or less intuitive to different people, and more or less suitable for different
applications. For example, the last two, which are formally equivalent, are
the most intuitive for experimentalists, and it is conceptually equivalent to
what they do when they vary — within reasonable intervals — all Monte
46               Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical    introduction


Carlo parameters in order to estimate the systematic errors. 17 The third
form is particularly convenient to make linear expansions which lead to
approximate solutions (see Sec. 8.6).
    There is an important remark to be made. In some cases it is preferable
not to 'integrate' over all /i's. Instead, it is better to report the result
as /(/it | {h}), where {h} stands for a subset of h, taken at their nominal
values, if:

  • {h} could be controlled better by the users of the result (for example
    hi € {h} is a theoretical quantity on which there is work in progress);
  • there is some chance of achieving a better knowledge of {h} within
    the same experiment (for example hi could be the overall calibration
    constant of a calorimeter);
  • a discrete and small number of very different hypotheses could affect
    the result. For example, considering the coupling constant as between
    quarks and gluons, we could have

                               f(as\M1,0(a2t),...)         = ...                        (2.7)
                                            2
                               f(as\M2,0(a 8),...)         = ...,                       (2.8)

          where Mi and Mi are two theoretical models, and 0(a2s) stands for
          second order approximation. 18

If results are presented under the condition of {h}, one should also report
the derivatives of fi with respect to the result, so that one does not have
to redo the complete analysis when the influence factors are better known.
A typical example from particle physics in which this is usually done is the
possible variation of the result due to the uncertainty on the charm-quark
mass. An example in which this idea has been applied thoroughly is given
in Ref. [38].


2.10.4         Approximate        methods
Of extreme practical importance are the approximate methods, which en­
able us not only to avoid having to use Bayes' theorem explicitly, but also
to avoid working with probability distributions. In particular, propagation
     17
      But, in order to give a well-defined probabilistic meaning to the result, the variations
must be performed according to f(h), and not arbitrary.
   18
      This is, in fact, the standard way in which this kind of result has often been presented
in the past (apart from the inessential fact that only best values and standard deviations
are given, assuming normality).
               A probabilistic theory of measurement   uncertainty        47


of uncertainty, including that due to statistical effects of unknown size, is
done in this way in all routine applications, as has been remarked in the
previous section. These methods are discussed in Chapters 8 and 12, to­
gether with some words of caution about their uncritical use (see Sees. 8.11,
8.12 and 8.14).
This page is intentionally left blank
      Part 2


A Bayesian primer
This page is intentionally left blank
                               Chapter 3

               Subjective probability
                and Bayes' theorem


                    "The only relevant thing is uncertainty - the extent of our
                  knowledge and ignorance. The actual fact of whether or not
                        the events considered are in some sense determined, or
                      known by other people, and so on, is of no consequence"
                                                             (Bruno de Finetti)

                                     "The best way to explain it is, I'll bet you
                                      fifty to one that you don't End anything"
                                                             (Richard Feynman)

                         "I do not believe that the Lord is a weak left-hander,
                                       and I am ready to bet a large sum that
                                  the experiments will give symmetric results"
                                                              (Wolfgang Pauli)

                         "It is a bet of 11,000 to 1 that the error on this result
                                [the mass of Saturn] is not l/100th of its value"
                                                         (Pierre-Simone Laplace)


3.1   What is probability?

The standard answers to this question are

(1) "the ratio of the number of favorable cases to the number of all cases";

(2) "the ratio of the number of times the event occurs in a test series to
    the total number of trials in the series".

It is very easy to show that neither of these statements can define the
concept of probability:


                                      51
52              Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


     • Definition (1) lacks the clause "if all the cases are equally probable".
       This has been done here intentionally, because people often forget it.
       The fact that the definition of probability makes use of the term "proba­
       bility" is clearly embarrassing. Often in textbooks the clause is replaced
       by "if all the cases are equally possible", ignoring that in this context
       "possible" is just a synonym of "probable". There is no way out. This
       statement does not define probability but gives, at most, a useful rule
       for evaluating it - assuming we know what probability is, i.e. of what
       we are talking about. The fact that this definition is labelled "classical"
       or "Laplace" simply shows that some authors are not aware of what
       the "classicals" (Bayes, Gauss, Laplace, Bernoulli, etc.) thought about
       this matter. 1 We shall call this "definition" combinatorial.
     • Definition (2) is also incomplete, since it lacks the condition that the
       number of trials must be very large ("it goes to infinity"). But this is a
       minor point. The crucial point is that the statement merely defines the
       relative frequency with which an event (a "phenomenon") occurred in
       the past. To use frequency as a measurement of probability we have to
       assume that the phenomenon occurred in the past, and will occur in the
       future, with the same probability. But who can tell if this hypothesis
       is correct? Nobody: we have to guess in every single case. Note that,
       while in the first "definition" the assumption of equal probability was
       explicitly stated, the analogous clause is often missing from the second
       one. We shall call this "definition" frequentistic.

We have to conclude that if we want to make use of these statements to
assign a numerical value to probability, in those cases in which we judge
that the clauses are satisfied, we need a better definition of probability.


3.2       Subjective definition of probability

So, "what is probability?" Consulting a good dictionary helps. Webster's
states, for example, that "probability is the quality, state, or degree of being
probable", and then that probable means "supported by evidence strong
enough to make it likely though not certain to be true". The concept of
      1
     For example, even the famous 'Laplace definition' contains, explicitly, the word be­
lieve {croire in French): "La probabitite d'un evenement est le rapport du nombre des cas
qui lui sont favorables au nombre de tous les cas possibles, lorsque rien ne porte a croire
que I'un de ces cas doit arriver plutot que les autres" [39]. It is instructive to remember
that Laplace considered probability theory "good sense turned into calculation."
                             Subjective probability and Bayes'               theorem                         53


           Q Event £ )                                                    ©
       logical point of view                       FALSE ( o )                       ( 7 ) TRUE


       cognitive point of view          FALSE ( o )     UNCERTAIN/?"")
                                                                                               © TRUE
                if certain
psychological
 (subjective)   if uncertain,
                                FALSE CO)
                                                  /'
                                                       ^/////l\\%^

                                            z- ^/ / ^/ ./ /   7
                                                                  /                        x
                                                                                    \ \ \ ^ \^ \ ^\ \^
                                                                                                       9   TRUE

point of view   with
                probability            0     0,10 0,20 0,30 0,40 0,50 0,60 0,70 0,80 0,90 1

                                       [-                             Probability                   J


                   Fig. 3.1       Certain a n d uncertain events (de F i n e t t i [40]).


probable arises in reasoning when the concept of certain is not applicable.
If we cannot state firmly whether an event is 'true' or 'false', we just say
that this is possible or probable, where by 'event' we mean the physical or
conceptual fact described in words by a 'proposition' (indeed, we shall use
the term event as a synonym for any possible statement, or proposition,
relative to past, present or future).
    Different events may have different degree of probability, depending
whether we think that they are more likely to be true or false (see Fig. 3.1).
Different expressions could be used to mean exactly the same concept. For
example, given two events Ei and E2, we could say: we consider E2 more
likely than E\; you are more confident in E2; having to choose between
Ei and E2 to win a price, you would promptly choose E2. The concept of
probability is then simply that of degree of belief 2 in an event, or

     a measure of the degree of belief that an event will occur,

where the latter is the formulation that one finds often in Bayesian literature
(the formulation cited here is that given in the ISO Guide [5]).
    The use of the future tense does not imply that this definition can only
be applied for future events. "Will occur" simply means that the statement
   2
     It is worth mentioning the definition used by Schrodinger in Ref. [41]: "Given the
state of our knowledge about everything that could possibly have any bearing on the
coming true of a certain event (thus in dubio: of the sum total of our knowledge), the
numerical probability p of this event is to be a real number by the indication of which
we try in some cases to set up a quantitative measure of the strength of our conjecture
or anticipation, founded on the said knowledge, that the event comes true".
54              Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


"will be proven to be true", even if it refers to the past. Think for example
of "the probability that it was raining in Rome on the day of the battle of
Waterloo".
     At first sight this definition does not seem to be superior to the combi­
natorial or the frequentistic ones. At least they give some practical rules to
calculate "something". Defining probability as "degree of belief" seems too
vague to be of any use. We need, then, some explanation of its meaning; a
tool to evaluate it - and we will look at this tool (Bayes' theorem) later. We
will end this section with some explanatory remarks on the definition, but
first let us discuss the advantages of this definition. (See also Ref. [32] for
comments of some common misconceptions about subjective probability.)
     • It is natural, very general and can be applied to any thinkable event,
       independently of the feasibility of making an inventory of all (equally)
       possible and favorable cases, or of repeating the experiment under con­
       ditions of equal probability.
     • It avoids the linguistic schizophrenia of having to distinguish "scientific"
       probability from "non scientific" probability used in everyday reasoning
       (though a meteorologist might feel offended to hear that evaluating the
       probability of rain tomorrow is "not scientific").
     • As far as measurements are concerned, it allows us to talk about the
       probability of the true value of a physical quantity, or of any scientific
       hypothesis. In the frequentistic frame it is only possible to talk about
       the probability of the outcome of an experiment, as the true value is
       considered to be a constant. This approach is so unnatural that most
       physicists speak of "95 % probability that the mass of the top quark
       is between ...", although they believe that the correct definition of
       probability is the limit of the frequency (see details in Ref. [30]).
     • It is possible to make a very general theory of uncertainty which can
       take into account any source of statistical or systematic error, indepen­
       dently of their distribution.

    To get a better understanding of the subjective definition of probability
let us take a look at odds in betting. The higher the degree of belief that
an event will occur, the higher the amount of money A that someone ("a
rational better") is ready to pay in order to receive a sum of money B if
the event occurs. Clearly the bet must be acceptable in both directions
( "coherent" is the correct adjective), i.e. the amount of money A must be
smaller or equal to B and not negative (who would accept such a bet?).
The cases of A = 0 and A = B mean that the events are considered to be
                      Subjective probability and Bayes'   theorem                      55


false or true, respectively, and obviously it is not worth betting on certainty.
They are just limit cases, and in fact they can be treated with standard
logic. It seems reasonable 3 that the amount of money A that one is willing
to pay grows linearly with the degree of belief. It follows that if someone
thinks that the probability of the event E is p, then he will bet A = pB
to get B if the event occurs, and to lose pB if it does not. It is easy to
demonstrate that the condition of "coherence" implies that 0 < p < 1.
    What has gambling to do with physics? The definition of probability
through betting odds has to be considered operational, although there is
no need to make a bet (with whom?) each time one presents a result.
It has the important role of forcing one to make an honest assessment of
the value of probability that one believes. One could replace money with
other forms of gratification or penalization, like the increase or the loss of
scientific reputation. Moreover, the fact that this operational procedure is
not to be taken literally should not be surprising. Many physical quantities
are defined in a similar way. Think, for example, of the textbook definition
of the electric field, and try to use it to measure E in the proximity of
an electron. A nice example [42] comes from the definition of a poisonous
chemical compound: it would be lethal if ingested. Clearly it is preferable
to keep this operational definition at a hypothetical level, even though it is
the best definition of the concept.



3.3    Rules of probability

The subjective definition of probability, together with the condition of co­
herence, requires that 0 < p < 1. This is one of the rules which probability
has to obey. It is possible, in fact, to demonstrate that coherence yields
to the standard rules of probability, generally known as axioms. In other
words, "beliefs follow the same grammar of abstract axiomatic probability."
    There is no single way to derive this important result, de Finetti's co­
herence [16] is considered the best guidance by many leading Bayesians (see
e.g. Refs. [27,43]). Others, in particular practitioners close to the Jaynes'
   3
     This is not always true in real life. There are also other practical problems related
to betting which have been treated in the literature. Other variations of the definition
have also been proposed, like the one based on the penalization rule. A discussion of
the problem goes beyond the purpose of this text. Some hints about decision problems
will be given in Sec. 3.9. Many authors talk explicitly of 'small amount of money B',
such that the perception of the 'value of money' does not differ substantially from one
individual to another.
56       Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical     introduction




           E\jE=Q                                           A CB




          C = Ar\B
          D=AvB=AnB                                  C = Ar\B = A\JB




     Ar\(BvC) = (AnBMAnC)
     D = Ar\Br\C; E = AvBvC                      A v(BnC) = (AvB)ni(AvC)

                                                                            h)




                                                           F=\)M(FnEJ
           E^Ej = 0        Vy

                Fig. 3.2   Venn diagrams and set properties.
                   Subjective probability and Bayes'   theorem               57


Maximum Entropy [44] school, feel easier with Cox' logical consistency rea­
soning [45] (see also Refs. [45,46,47], and in particular Tribus' book [48] for
accurate derivations and a clear account of meaning and role of information
entropy in data analysis). An approach similar to Cox's is followed by Jef­
freys [49], another leading figure who has contributed to give new vitality
to the methods based on this "new" point of view on probability. Note that
Cox and Jeffreys were physicists. Remarkably, also Schrodinger arrived at
similar conclusions [41,50], though his definition of event is very similar to
de Finetti's one, i.e. referring only to a verifiable "state of affairs (or fact
or occurrence or happening)" [41].
    Before reviewing the basic rules of probability it is worth clarifying the
relationship between the axiomatic approach and the others.
  • Combinatorial and frequentistic "definitions" give useful rules for eval­
    uating probability, although they do not, as it is often claimed, define
    the concept.
  • In the axiomatic approach one refrains from defining what the probabil­
    ity is and how to evaluate it: probability is just any real number which
    satisfies the axioms. It is easy to demonstrate that the probabilities
    evaluated using the combinatorial and the frequentistic prescriptions
    do in fact satisfy the axioms.
  • The subjective approach to probability, together with the coherence
    requirement, defines what probability is and provides the rules which
    its evaluation must obey; these rules turn out to be the same as the
    axioms.

    Since everybody is familiar with the axioms and with the analogy
events <$ sets (see Tab. 3.1 and Fig. 3.2) let us remind ourselves of the
rules of probability in this form:
Axiom 1 0 < P(E) < 1;
Axiom 2 P(Q) = 1 (a certain event has probability 1);
Axiom 3 P{E1 U E2) = P{Ei) + P{E2), if E1f)E2 = 0-
From the basic rules the following properties can be derived:
1:   P(E) = 1 - P(E);
2:   P(0) = 0;
3:   if A C B then P(A) < P(B);
4:   P{A UB)= P{A) + P(B) - P(A n B).
We also anticipate here another rule which will be discussed in Sec. 3.5.1:
58           Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical     introduction


                          Table 3.1   Events versus sets.
              Events                                  Sets
                                                                 Symbol
      event                      set                               E
      certain event              sample space                         n
      impossible event           empty set                            0
      implication                inclusion                       Ei       CE2
                                 (subset)
      opposite event             complementary set           E    ( E U E = n)
      (complementary)
      logical product ("AND")    intersection                    Ei riE2
      logical sum ("OR")         union                           Ei U E 2
      incompatible events        disjoint sets                 EinE2    = <&
                                                         (EitlEj     = ®   Vi^j
      complete class             finite partition
                                                        \ UiEi = n



5: P{A n B) = P(A | B) P(B) = P{A) P(B | A).


3.4   Subjective probability and 'objective' description of the
      physical world

The subjective definition of probability seems to contradict the aim of physi­
cists to describe the laws of physics in the most objective way (whatever
this means . . . ) . This is one of the reasons why many regard the subjective
definition of probability with suspicion (but probably the main reason is
because we have been taught at university that "probability is frequency").
The main philosophical difference between this concept of probability and
an objective definition that "we would have liked" (but which does not exist
in reality) is that P(E) is not an intrinsic characteristic of the event E, but
depends on the state of information available to whoever evaluates P(E).
The ideal concept of "objective" probability is recovered when everybody
has the "same" state of information. But even in this case it would be
better to speak of intersubjective probability. The best way to convince
ourselves about this aspect of probability is to try to ask practical ques­
tions and to evaluate the probability in specific cases, instead of seeking
refuge in abstract questions. I find, in fact, that — to paraphrase a famous
statement about Time — "Probability is objective as long as I am not asked
to evaluate it." Here are some examples.

E x a m p l e 1: "What is the probability that a molecule of nitrogen at room
     temperature has a velocity between 400 and 500 m/s?". The answer
                    Subjective probability and Bayes'      theorem                     59


     Table 3.2 Results of measurements of the gravitational constant Gff at the
     end of 1995.
                                                                        CjY
               Institute                   G~N              ^pP^              ~G^

                                       1 0 -11   m"
                                           - " Tkgs2
                                                 ^4)        (ppm)       (10-3)
       CODATA 1986 ("G%")            6.6726   ±   0.0009     128"
        P T B (Germany) 1994         6.7154   ±   0.0006     83      +6.41 ± 0 . 1 6
      MSL (New Zealand) 1994         6.6656   ±   0.0006     95      -1.05 ±0.16
      Wuppertal (Germany) 1995       6.6685   ±   0.0007     105     -0.61 ±0.17



    appears easy: "take the Maxwell distribution formula from a textbook,
    calculate an integral and get a number". Now let us change the ques­
    tion: "/ give you a vessel containing nitrogen and a detector capable of
    measuring the speed of a single molecule and you set up the apparatus
    (or you let a person you trust do it). Now, what is the probability that
    the first molecule that hits the detector has a velocity between 400 and
    500 m/s?". Anybody who has minimal experience (direct or indirect)
    of experiments would hesitate before answering. He would study the
    problem carefully and perform preliminary measurements and checks.
    Finally he would probably give not just a single number, but a range
    of possible numbers compatible with the formulation of the problem.
    Then he starts the experiment and eventually, after 10 measurements,
    he may form a different opinion about the outcome of the eleventh
    measurement.
Example 2: "What is the probability that the gravitational constant GN
   has a value between 6.6709 • 10" 1 1 and 6.6743 • 10" 1 1 m 3 k g " V 2 ? " .
   Before 1994 you could have looked at the latest issue of the Particle
   Data Book (PDG) [51] and answered that the probability was 95 %. At
   the end of 1995 three new measurements were available [52] and the four
   numbers do not agree with each other (see Tab. 3.2). The probability
   of the true value of GN being in that range was suddenly dramatically
   decreased.
Example 3: "What is the probability that the mass of the top quark, or
   that of any of the supersymmetric particles, is below 20 or 50 GeV/c 2 ?".
   Currently it looks as if it must be zero. In the 80's many experiments
   were intensively looking for these particles in those energy ranges. Be­
   cause so many people where searching for them, with enormous human
   and capital investment, it meant that, at that time, the probability was
   considered rather high: high enough for fake signals to be reported as
   strong evidence for them.
60            Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


The above examples show how the evaluation of probability is conditioned
by some a priori ("theoretical") prejudices and by some facts ("experi­
mental data"). "Absolute" probability makes no sense. Even the classical
example of probability 1/2 for each of the results in tossing a coin is only
acceptable if: the coin is regular, it does not remain vertical (not impossible
when playing on the beach), it does not fall into a manhole, etc.
   The subjective point of view is expressed in a provocative way by de
Finetti's [16]

               "PROBABILITY DOES NOT EXIST".

3.5     Conditional probability and Bayes' theorem

3.5.1     Dependence      of the probability       on the state      of    infor­
          mation
If the state of information changes, the evaluation of the probability also has
to be modified. For example most people would agree that the probability
of a car being stolen depends on the model, age and parking site. To take
an example from physics, the probability that in a detector a charged par­
ticle gives a certain number of Analog to Digital Converter (ADC) counts
due to the energy loss in a gas detector can be evaluated in a very general
way by making a (huge) Monte Carlo simulation which takes into account
all possible reactions (weighted with their cross-sections), all possible back­
grounds, changing all physical and detector parameters within reasonable
ranges, and also taking into account the trigger efficiency. The probabil­
ity changes if one knows that the particle is a 1 GeV K+: instead of very
complicated Monte Carlo simulation one can just run a single particle gen­
erator at fixed energy. The probability changes further if one also knows
the exact gas mixture, pressure, etc., up to the latest determination of the
pedestal and the temperature of the ADC module. More in general, using
Schrodinger words [41],

       "Since the knowledge may be different with different persons or with the
      same person at different times, they may anticipate the same event with
      more or less confidence, and thus different numerical probabilities may
      be attached to the same event. ... Thus whenever we speak loosely of
      the 'probability of an event,' it is always to be understood: probability
      with regard to a certain given state of knowledge."
                    Subjective probability and Bayes'   theorem                   61


3.5.2    Conditional       probability
Although everybody knows the formula of conditional probability, it is use­
ful to derive it here in a kind of "standard way". A derivation closer to
subjectivist spirit will be given in Sec. 10.3, where the meaning of the re­
sulting formula will be described in more detail.
    The notation is P{E \H), to be read "probability of E given H", where
H stands for hypothesis. This means: the probability that E will occur
under the hypothesis that H has occurred 4 .
    The event E \ H can have three values:

T R U E : if E is TRUE and H is TRUE;
FALSE: if E is FALSE and H is TRUE;
U N D E T E R M I N E D : if H is FALSE; in this case we are merely uninter­
    ested in what happens to E. In terms of betting, the bet is invalidated
    and none loses or gains.

Then P(E) can be written P(E | f2), to state explicitly that it is the proba­
bility of E whatever happens to the rest of the world (fi means all possible
events). We realize immediately that this condition is really too vague and
nobody would bet a cent on such a statement. The reason for usually writ­
ing P(E) is that many conditions are implicitly, and reasonably, assumed
in most circumstances. In the classical problems of coins and dice, for ex­
ample, one assumes that they are regular. In the example of the energy
loss of the previous section it was implicit ("obvious") that the high voltage
was on (at which voltage?) and that the accelerator was operational (under
which condition?). But one has to take care: many riddles are based on the
fact that one tries to find a solution which is valid under stricter conditions
than those explicitly stated in the question [53], and many people make
bad business deals by signing contracts in which what "was obvious" was
not explicitly stated (or precisely the contrary was stated explicitly, but in
'small print', as in insurance policies...).
    In order to derive the formula of conditional probability let us assume
for a moment that it is reasonable to talk about "absolute probability"
   4
     P(E | H) should not be confused with P(E n H), "the probability that both events
occur". For example P(E n H) can be very small, but nevertheless P(E | H) very high.
Think of the limit case

                        P(H) = P(H n f f ) < P(H \H)-1       :

"H given H" is a certain event no matter how small P(H) is, even if P{H) = 0 (in the
sense of Sec. 4.2).
62          Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


P(E) =P(E\il),     and let us rewrite

                 p(E) = p{E\n)      =    p(Enn)
                                    a

                                    = P(En(Hu          H))
                                    = p ((E n H) i) (E nH))
                                    = P(EnH)       + p(EnH),                 (3.1)
                                    d
where the result has been achieved through the following steps:
(a) E implies ft (i.e. E C fl) and hence E D Q = E;
(b) the complementary events H and H make a finite partition of Q,, i.e.

(c) distributive property;
(d) axiom 3.

The final result of (3.1) is very simple: P(E) is equal to the probability
that E occurs and H also occurs, plus the probability that E occurs but
H does not occur. To obtain P(E \ H) we just get rid of the subset of E
which does not contain H (i.e. E n H) and renormalize the probability
dividing by P(H), assumed to be different from zero. This guarantees that
if E = H then P(H \H) = 1. We get, finally, the well-known formula




In the most general (and realistic) case, where both E and H are condi­
tioned by the occurrence of a third event Ha, the formula becomes

          P(E\H,H0)      = ^    ^    ^   -            [P(H\Ho)?0].           (3.3)

Usually we shall make use of Eq. (3.2) (which means H0 = fl) assuming
that 0 has been properly chosen. We should also remember that Eq. (3.2)
can be resolved with respect to P(E D H), obtaining

                        P(EDH)=P(E\H)P{H),                                   (3.4)

and by symmetry

                        P{Ef\H)      = P{H\E)P{E).                           (3.5)
                   Subjective probability and Bayes'   theorem               63


We remind that two events are called independent if

                          P(E n H) = P(E) P(H).                           (3.6)

This is equivalent to saying that P(E \ H) = P(E) and P(H \ E) = P(H),
i.e. the knowledge that one event has occurred does not change the prob­
ability of the other. If P(E\H)    ^ P(E), then the events E and H are
correlated. In particular:

 • if P(E | H) > P(E) then E and H are positively correlated;
 • if P{E | H) < P{E) then E and H are negatively correlated.


3.5.3   Bayes'     theorem
Let us think of all the possible, mutually exclusive, hypotheses Hi which
could condition the event E. The problem here is the inverse of the pre­
vious one: what is the probability of Hi under the hypothesis that E has
occurred? For example, "what is the probability that a charged particle
which went in a certain direction and has lost between 100 and 120 keV in
the detector is a \i, a -K, a K, or a p?" Our event E is "energy loss between
100 and 120keV", and Hi are the four "particle hypotheses". This example
sketches the basic problem for any kind of measurement: having observed
an effect, to assess the probability of each of the causes which could have
produced it. This intellectual process is called inference, and it will be
discussed in Sec. 5.1.1.
    In order to calculate P(H, | E) let us rewrite the joint probability P{Hif)
E), making use of Eqs. (3.4)-(3.5), in two different ways:

                    P(Hi | E)P(E)      = P(E | Hi) P(Hi),                 (3.7)

obtaining


                       P( g .|*)= F ( E i p % F W r]                    (3.8,
or

                           P(Hi\E)      _P(E\Hi)         I
                                                                           [6 y)
                            P(Hj)       -   P(E)        -\                   -

Since the hypotheses Hi are mutually exclusive (i.e. Hi n Hj = 0, Vi, j)
and exhaustive (i.e. \JiHi = ft), E can be written as IJ^ E Pi Ht, the union
64             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


of the intersections of E with each of the hypotheses Hi. It follows that

                   P(E) [= P(Enft)] = p I\J(EnHi)                j

                                          = J2P(EnHi)
                                               %
                                          = Y^P(E\Hi)P(Hi),                     (3.10)
                                               i

where we have made use of Eq. (3.4) again in the last step. It is then
possible to rewrite Eq. (3.8) as

                                          P(E\Hj)P(Hj)
                        P{Hi\E)     =                                           (3.11)
                                        ^jP{E\Hj)P{Hj)-

This is the standard form by which Eayes' theorem is known. Equa­
tions (3.8) and (3.9) are also different ways of writing it. As the de­
nominator of Eq. (3.11) is nothing but a normalization factor, such that
Y^,i P{Hi \E) — 1, formula (3.11) can be written as

                          P(Hi | E) oc P(E | Hi) P(Hi                           (3.12)

Factorizing P{Hi) in Eq. (3.11), and explicitly writing that all the events
were already conditioned by HQ, we can rewrite the formula as

                          P(Hi\E,H0)       =       aP(Hi\H0),                   (3.13)

with
                                     P(E\HUH0)
                                                                                (3.14)
                              ^iP{E\Hi,H0)P{Hi\H0)-
These five ways of rewriting the same formula simply reflect the importance
that we shall give to this simple theorem. They stress different aspects of
the same concept.

     • Equation (3.11) is the standard way of writing it, although some prefer
       Eq. (3.8).
     • Equation (3.9) indicates that P(Hi) is altered by the condition E with
       the same ratio with which P(E) is altered by the condition Hi.
     • Equation (3.12) is the simplest and the most intuitive way to formulate
       the theorem: "the probability of Hi given E is proportional to the
       initial probability of Hi times the probability of E given Hi".
                      Subjective probability and Bayes'   theorem                       65


    Equations (3.13)-(3.14) show explicitly how the probability of a certain
    hypothesis is updated when the state of information changes:
      P(Hi | H0) [also indicated as P0 (Hi)} is the initial, or a priori, proba­
       bility (or simply 'prior') of Hi, i.e. the probability of this hypothesis
       with the state of information available 'before' the knowledge that
       E has occurred;
     P(Hi\E,H0)       [or simply P(Hi\E)} is the final, or 'a posteriori',
       probability of Hi 'after' the new information.
      P(E | Hi, H0) [or simply P(E \ Ht)] is called likelihood.
    Note that 'before' and 'after' do not really necessarily imply time order­
    ing, but only the consideration or not of the new piece of information.

To better understand the terms 'initial', 'final' and 'likelihood', let us for­
mulate the problem in a way closer to the physicist's mentality, referring to
causes and effects: 'causes' are all the physical sources capable of produing
a given observable (the effect). The 'likelihood' indicates — as the word
suggests — "the likelihood that a cause will produce a given effect" (not
to be confused with "the likelihood that an effect is due to a given cause"
which has a different meaning: A 'likelihood' may be arbitrarily small, but
in spite of this, it is certain that an effect is due to a given cause, if there
are no other causes capable of producing that effect!).
     Using our example of the energy loss measurement again, the causes are
all the possible charged particles which can pass through the detector; the
effect is the amount of observed ionization; the likelihoods are the proba­
bilities that each of the particles give that amount of ionization. Note that
in this example we have fixed all the other sources of influence: physics
process, accelerator operating conditions, gas mixture, high voltage, track
direction, etc. This is our H0. The problem immediately gets rather com­
plicated (all real cases, apart from tossing coins and dice, are complicated!).
The real inference would be of the kind

               P(Hi | E, H0) oc P(E | Hu H 0 ) P(Hi | H0) P{H0).                    (3.15)

For each state H0 (the set of all the possible values of the influence param­
eters) one gets a different result for the final probability 5 . So, instead of
    5
      T h e symbol oc could be misunderstood if one forgets that the proportionality factor
depends on all likelihoods and priors [see Eq. (3.13)]. This means that, for a given hypoth­
esis Hi, as the state of information E changes, P(Hi | E, H0) may change if P(E \ Hi, H0)
and P(Hi \ Ha) remain constant, and if some of the other likelihoods get modified by the
new information.
66           Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical     introduction


getting a single number for the final probability we have a distribution of
values. This spread will result in a large uncertainty of P(Hi | E). This is
what every physicist knows: if the calibration constants of the detector and
the physics process are not under control, the "systematic errors" are large
and the result is of poor quality.


3.5.4    'Conventional'          use of Bayes'      theorem
Bayes' theorem follows directly from the rules of probability, and it can be
used apparently in any kind of approach. Let us take an example:

Problem 1: A particle detector has a /i identification efficiency of 95%,
   and a probability of identifying a TV as a /z of 2 %. If a particle is
   identified as a /z, then a trigger is fired. Knowing that the particle
   beam is a mixture of 90 % n and 10 % /i, what is the probability that a
   trigger is really fired by a \xl What is the signal-to-noise {S/N) ratio?
Solution: The two hypotheses (causes) which could condition the event
    (effect) T (= "trigger fired") are "/x" and ' V . They are incompatible
    (clearly) and exhaustive (90% + 10% = 100%). Then:

                   P(     \T\-                   P{T\lX)Po{il)
                   P
                    ^     I T) ~ P(T | „) PoGu) + P(T | Tr)       PO(TT)
                                                                                      {6Ab)

                                                                                (3.17)
                                         0.95x0.1
                                    0.95x0.1 + 0.02 x 0.9        0.84,
     and P(?r | T) = 0.16.
     The S/N ratio is P(/z | T)/P(n | T) = 5.3. It is interesting to rewrite
     the general expression of the S/N ratio if the effect E is observed as

                        i/iV                                                     [6     8j
                               " P(N | E) ~ P(E I N) ' P0(N) •
     This formula explicitly shows that when there are noisy conditions,

                                     P0(S)«P0(N),

     the experiment must be very selective,

                                   P(E | 5) > P(E | TV),

     in order to have a decent S/N ratio.
     (How does S/N change if the particle has to be identified by two in-
                  Subjective probability and Bayes'   theorem             67


   dependent detectors in order to give the trigger? Try it yourself, the
   answer is S/N = 251.)
Problem 2: Three boxes contain two rings each, but in one of them they
   are both gold, in the second both silver, and in the third one of each
   type. You have the choice of randomly extracting a ring from one of
   the boxes, the content of which is unknown to you. You look at the
   selected ring, and you then have the possibility of extracting a second
   ring, again from any of the three boxes. Let us assume the first ring
   you extract is gold. Is it then preferable to extract the second one from
   the same or from a different box?
Solution: Choosing the same box you have a 2/3 probability of getting
   a second gold ring. (Try to apply the theorem, or help yourself with
   intuition; the solution is given in Sec. 3.12.)

The difference between the two problems, from the conventional statistics
point of view, is that the first seems to be only meaningful in the fre-
quentistic approach, the second only in the combinatorial one. However,
in a deeper analysis, the situation is a bit more complicated and, sticking
strictly to the 'definitions', there is trouble in both cases.

  • Problem 1 uses frequency derived probabilities (the beam composition
    and the detector efficiency), obtaining the relative frequencies for each
    kind of particle when the trigger fired. This seems consistent with
    the frequentistic scheme. The first trouble comes when the reasoning
    is applied to a single event in which the trigger has fired (Why not?
    You could be interested in that event, e.g. because that particular
    particle has produced a spectacular effect in the apparatus and you
    are interested in understanding its cause.) Unavoidably - and often
    unconsciously - physicists will turn these numbers into probability of
    hypotheses, in the sense of how much they have to believe in the two
    possibilities (fi or 7r?).
    The second trouble is more general and subtle, and also affects the
    meaning of some of the initial data of the problem. Imagine that after
    the particles have passed the detector they are lost, or they interact in
    such a way that they are not identifiable on the event-by-event base.
    What is the meaning of the calculated frequencies? Certainly, it is
    not like rolling a coin of 'unknown bias'. It is not something that
    we can relate to real 'random processes' a la von Mises [54] to which
    the frequentistic definition applies. In sum, then, also in this case the
    situation is not dissimilar from the single event.
68              Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


     • Problem 2 seems quite, a classical text book exercise. Let us take a
       closer look at it. As we said earlier, the solution lies in that the prob­
       ability of finding a gold or silver ring in the same box is 2/3 and 1/3,
       respectively. The only trouble is, once more, the meaning of these
       numbers. There are only two events, gold and silver. What are the
       equiprobable 'possible' and 'favorable' cases which will result in the
       events? If probability is that famous ratio, at any moment we could be
       required to list the equiprobable cases which enter into this evaluation.
       This is already a hard task even in this simple exercise! Again, every­
       body (mostly intuitively) interprets 2/3 and 1/3 as how much we can
       be confident in either hypothesis.

In conclusion, even these simple 'standard' problems have a consistent so­
lution only in the Bayesian approach. Moreover, apart from the question
of how to interpret the results, in many and important cases of life and
science, neither of the two conventional definitions is applicable from the
very beginning.


3.6       Bayesian statistics: learning by experience

The advantage of the Bayesian approach (leaving aside the "little philo­
sophical detail" of trying to define what probability is) is that one may talk
about the probability of any kind of event, as already emphasized. More­
over, the procedure of updating the probability with increasing information
is very similar to that followed by the mental processes of rational people.6
Let us consider a few examples of "Bayesian use" of Bayes' theorem.

Example 1: Imagine some persons listening to a common friend having a
   phone conversation with an unknown person Xi, and who are trying
   to guess who Xi is. Depending on the knowledge they have about the
   friend, on the language spoken, on the tone of voice, on the subject of
   conversation, etc., they will attribute some probability to several pos­
   sible persons. As the conversation goes on they begin to consider some
      6
    How many times have you met neighbors far from home and wondered for a while who
they are? Think also how difficult it is to understand a person in a noisy environment, or
a person who speaks your language poorly, if you do not know what he wants to say (this
process happens every time you hear something which sounds illogical or simply 'wrong'
and, trusting the good faith of the person, who hopefully wanted to say something
meaningful, you try to interpret the message 'correctly'). Ref. [55] shows an interesting
study on the relation between perception and Bayesian inference.
                   Subjective probability and Bayes'   theorem             69


    possible candidates for Xi, discarding others, then hesitating perhaps
    only between a couple of possibilities, until the state of information I
    is such that they are practically sure of the identity of Xi. This expe­
    rience has happened to most of us, and it is not difficult to recognize
    the Bayesian scheme:


                     P(Xi 1I, J 0 ) a P(I | Xu J 0 ) P(Xi | J 0 ) .     (3.19)


     We have put the initial state of information I0 explicitly in Eq. (3.19)
     to remind us that likelihoods and initial probabilities depend on it. If
     we know nothing about the person, the final probabilities will be very
      vague, i.e. for many persons Xi the probability will be different from
     zero, without necessarily favoring any particular person.
E x a m p l e 2: A person X meets an old friend F in a pub. F proposes
     that the drinks should be paid for by whichever of the two extracts the
     card of lower value from a pack (according to some rule which is of no
     interest to us). X accepts and F wins. This situation happens again
     in the following days and it is always X who has to pay. What is the
     probability that F has become a cheat, as the number of consecutive
     wins n increases?
      The two hypotheses are: cheat (C) and honest (H). PD(C) is low
     because F is an "old friend", but certainly not zero: let us assume 5 %.
      To make the problem simpler let us make the approximation that a
     cheat always wins (not very clever...): P(Wn \C) = 1. The probability
     of winning if he is honest is, instead, given by the rules of probability
      assuming that the chance of winning at each trial is 1/2 ("why not?",
     we shall come back to this point later): P(Wn \ H) = 2~n. The result



              P(C\Wa)=                     P{Wn\C)Po{C)
                              P(Wn I C) P0(C) + P(Wn I H) P0{H)
                                                                        (3.20)
                                        1 x P0(C)
                                                                        (3.21)
                              lxP0(C)     +     2-nxP0(H)


    is shown in the following table.
70           Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


                           n     P(C | Wn)      P(H | Wn)
                                    (%)            (%)
                           0         5.0           95.0
                           1         9.5           90.5
                           2        17.4           82.6
                           3        29.4           70.6
                           4        45.7           54.3
                           5        62.7           37.3
                           6        77.1           22.9




     Naturally, as F continues to win the suspicion of X increases. It is
     important to make two remarks.

     • The answer is always probabilistic. X can never reach absolute cer­
       tainty that F is a cheat, unless he catches F cheating, or F confesses
       to having cheated. This is coherent with the fact that we are dealing
       with random events and with the fact that any sequence of outcomes
       has the same probability (although there is only one possibility over
       2 n in which F is always luckier). Making use of P(C \ Wn), X can
       make a decision about the next action to take:

         — continue the game, with probability P(C \ Wn) of losing with
          certainty the next time too;
         — refuse to play further, with probability P(H \ Wn) of offending
          the innocent friend.

     • If -Po(C) = 0 the final probability will always remain zero: if X fully
       trusts F , then he just has to record the occurrence of a rare event
       when n becomes large.

     To better follow the process of updating the probability when new
     experimental data become available, according to the Bayesian scheme

        "the final probability of the present inference is the initial proba­
        bility of the next one".

     Let us call P(C \ Wn-i)    the probability assigned after the previous win.
                    Subjective probability and Bayes'   theorem              71


      The sequential application of the Bayes formula yields
                                    P{W\C)P{C\Wn_1)
          P(C\Wn)    =
                         P(W I C) P(C I W„_i) + P(W I H) P{H | W n _i)
                                                                   (3.22)
                                     \xPiC\Wn-x)
                                                                         (3.23)
                         1 x P(C | W„_i) + 1/2 x P ( t f I W n _i) '

      where P(W \ C) = 1 and P ( W | if) = 1/2 are the probabilities of each
      win. The interesting result is that exactly the same values of P(C \ Wn)
      of Eq. (3.21) are obtained (try to believe it!).

   It is also instructive to see the dependence of the final probability on
the initial probabilities, for a given number of wins n.


                 P°(C)                  P(C | Wn)
                  (%)                      (%)
                          n =5      n = 10 n = 15           n = 20
                  1%        24       91.1     99.70          99.99
                 2.5%       45       96.3     99.88          99.996
                  5%        63       98.2     99.94          99.998
                 10%        78       99.1     99.97          99.999
                 50%        97       99.90   99.997         99.9999


As the number of experimental observations increases the conclusions no
longer depend, practically, on the initial assumptions. This is a crucial
point in the Bayesian scheme and it will be discussed in more detail later.
Another interesting feature we learn from the table is that the results are
stable relative to reasonable variations of the prior (see for example the
factor of two variations around P0 (C) = 5%) (the study of the dependence
of the results on the assumptions is referred to as sensitivity study, or
sensitivity analysis).


3.7     Hypothesis 'test' (discrete case)

Although in conventional statistics books this argument is usually dealt
with in one of the later chapters, in the Bayesian approach it is so natural
that it is in fact the first application, as we have seen in the above examples.
72              Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical         introduction


   If one needs to compare two hypotheses, as in the example of the signal
to noise calculation, the ratio of the final probabilities can be taken as a
quantitative result of the test. Let us rewrite the S/N formula (3.18) in
the most general case:
                   P(ffi|E,ff„)       =   P{E\H1,H0)          P(ffi |          ffo)       ,
                                                                                          l
                   P{H2\E,H0)             P(E\H2,H0)'         P{H2\H0)'                       "   '
where again we have reminded ourselves of the existence of H0 ■ The ratio
depends on the product of two terms: the ratio of the priors and the ratio
of the likelihoods. When there is absolutely no reason for choosing between
the two hypotheses, the prior ratio is 1 and the decision depends only on
the other term, called the Bayes factor. If one firmly believes in either
hypothesis, the Bayes factor is of minor importance, unless it is zero or
infinite (i.e. one and only one of the likelihoods is vanishing). Perhaps
this is disappointing for those who expected objective certainty from a
probability theory, but this is in the nature of things.


3.7.1      Variations       over a problem          to    Newton
It seems7 that Isaac Newton was asked to solve the following problem. A
man condemned to death has an opportunity of having his life saved and
to be freed, depending on the outcome of an uncertain event. The man
can choose between three options: a) roll 6 dice, and be free if he gets '6'
with one and only one die (A); b) roll 12 dice, and be freed if he gets '6'
with exactly 2 dice; c) roll 18 dice, and be freed if he gets '6' in exactly 3
dice. Clearly, he will choose the event about which he is more confident (we
could also say the event which he considers more probable; the event most
likely to happen; the event which he believes mostly; and so on). Most likely
the condemned man is not able to solve the problem, but he certainly will
understand Newton's suggestion to choose A, which gives him the highest
chance to survive. He will also understand the statement that A is about
36% more likely than B and 64% more likely than C. 8 The condemned
man would perhaps ask Newton to give him some idea how likely the event
A is. A good answer would be to make a comparison with a box containing
100 balls, 40 of which are white. He should be as confident of surviving
     7
      My source of information is Ref. [56]. It seems that Newton gave the 'correct answer'
- indeed, in this stereotyped problem there is the correct answer.
    8
      T h e solution is an easy application of the binomial distribution. Using the notation
of Eq. (4.18), we have: P(A) = / ( l | B6 1 / 6 ) = 0.402, P(B) = / ( 2 | B 1 2 1 / 6 ) = 0.296 and
P ( C ) = / ( 3 | B 1 8 , 1 / B ) = 0.245.
                    Subjective probability and Bayes' theorem                   73


         • ••••     • •••o • ••oo • •ooo • oooo ooooo
            H0          Hi         H2         H3          H4        H5
Fig. 3.3 A box has with certainty one of these six black and white ball compo­
sitions. The content of the box is inferred by extracting at random a ball from
the box then returning it to the box. How confident are you initially of each
composition? How does your confidence change after the observation of 1, 5 and
8 consecutive extractions of a black ball? See Ref. [29] for an introduction to the
Bayesian reasoning based on this problem.

as of extracting a white ball from the box; i.e. 40% confident of being
freed and 60% confident of dying: not really an enviable situation, but
better than choosing C, corresponding to only 25 white balls in the box.
Note that the fact that any person is able to claim to be more confident
of extracting a white ball from the box that contains the largest fraction
of white balls, while for the evaluation of the above events one has to 'ask
Newton', does not imply a different perception of the probability in the two
classes of events. It is only because the events A, B and C are complex
events, the probability of which is evaluated from the probability of the
elementary events (and everybody can figure out what it means that the
six faces of a die are equally likely) plus some combinatorics, for which
some mathematical education is needed. The condemned man, trusting
Newton, will make Newton's beliefs his own beliefs, though he might never
understand how Newton arrived at those numbers.
    Let us imagine now a more complicated situation, in which you have
to make the choice (imagine for a moment you are the prisoner, just to
be emotionally more involved in this academic exercise. A box contains
with certainty 5 balls, with a white ball content ranging from 0 to 5, the
remaining balls being black (see Fig. 3.3, and Ref. [29] for further variations
on the problem). One ball is extracted at random, shown to you, and then
returned to the box. The ball is black. You get freed if you guess correctly
the composition of the box. Moreover you are allowed to ask a question, to
which the judges will reply correctly if the question is pertinent and such
that their answer does not indicate with certainty the exact content of the
box.
    Having observed a black ball, the only certainty is that H5 is ruled
out. As far as the other five possibilities are concerned, a first idea would
be to be more confident about the box composition which has more black
balls (Ho), since this composition gives the highest chance of extracting
this color. Following this reasoning, the confidence in the various box com-
74           Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


positions would be proportional to their black ball content. But it is not
difficult to understand that this solution is obtained by assuming that the
compositions are considered a priori equally possible. However, this condi­
tion was not stated explicitly in the formulation of the problem. How was
the box prepared? You might think of an initial situation of six boxes each
having a different composition. But you might also think that the balls
were picked at random from a large bag containing a roughly equal pro­
portion of white and black balls. Clearly, the initial situation changes. In
the second case the composition H0 is initially so unlikely that, even after
having extracted a black ball, it remains not very credible. The observation
alone is not enough to state how much one is confident about something.
     The use of Bayes' theorem to solve this problem is sketched in Fig. 3.4.
The top bar diagram shows the likelihood P(Black | Hi) of observing a black
ball assuming each possible composition; The second pair of plots shows
the two priors considered in our problem. The final probabilities are shown
next. We see that the two solutions are quite different, as a consequence
of different priors. So a good question to ask the judges would be how the
box was prepared. If they say it was uniform, bet your life on Ho. If they
say the five balls were extracted from a large bag, bet on H2 ■
     Perhaps the judges might be so clement as to repeat the extraction (and
subsequent reintroduction) several times. Figure 3.4 shows what happens
if five or height consecutive black balls are observed. The evaluation is
performed by sequential use of Bayes' theorem


                      Pn(Hi | E) oc P(En | Hi) Pn-^Hi).                        (3.25)


If you are convinced9 that the preparation procedure is binomial (large
bag), you still consider H\ more likely than H0, even after five consecutive
observations. Only after eight consecutive extractions of a black ball are
you mostly confident about Ho independently of how much you believe in
the two preparation procedures (but, obviously, you might imagine - and
perhaps even believe in - more fancy preparation procedures which still
give different results). After many extractions we are practically sure of
the box content, as we shall see in a while, though we can never be certain.

   9
     And if you have doubts about the preparation? The probability rules teach us
what to do. Calling V (uniform) and B (binomial) the two preparation procedures, with
probabilities P{U) and P(B), we have P(H | obs) = P(H | obs, U) ■ P(U) + P(H \ obs, B) ■
P{B).
                  Subjective probability and Bayes' theorem               75




Fig. 3.4 Confidence in the box contents (Fig. 3.3) as a function of prior and
observation (see text).
76           Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


3.8   Falsificationism and Bayesian statistics

If an observation is impossible, given a particular hypothesis, that hypoth­
esis will in turn become impossible ("false") if that observation is made.
On the other hand, no hypothesis can be declared 'true' until alterna­
tive hypotheses are conceivable. This straightforward application of Bayes'
theorem recovers the essence of Popper's falsificationism. However, a few
remarks are in order. First, all non-falsified hypotheses, which in falsifica­
tionism are in a kind of Limbo, in the Bayesian approach acquire different
degrees of beliefs depending on all available information. Second, one has
to be very careful to distinguish between what is impossible and what is
very improbable. As discussed at length in Sec. 1.8, many erroneous sci­
entific conclusions are the result of adopting statistical methods which are
essentially based on a confusion between impossible and improbable.


3.9   Probability versus decision

We have seen in the previous sections that beliefs are used to take decisions.
Taking decisions is usually more complicated and more subject-dependent
than assessing probability, because the decision depends not only on how
much the events are believed to happens, but also on the benefits and costs
that the events cause. If someone offers me odds of 10 to 1 on the outcome
of tossing an unbiased coin (i.e. I stand to win ten times what I wager), I
will consider it an incredible opportunity and will not hesitate to gamble
100 or 1000 dollars. And this would certainly be a good decision, even
though I stand a 50% chance of losing (yes, even if I were to lose, I would
still consider it to have been a good decision).
     The simplest figure of merit to classifying the advantage of a decision
is to consider the expected value of gain, i.e. the weighted average of the
gains, each weighted with its probability. For example, if I consider many
events Ei, to each of which I believe with probability P(Ei), and such that I
get a gain G(Ei) from their occurrence (some of the gains could be negative,
i.e. losses), my expected gain is

                     Expected gain = ^         P{E{) G(Ei).                   (3.26)
                                           i


In the case of the above bet, the expected gain is 1/2 x (—A) + 1/2 x
(+10A) = +4.5A, where A is the amount of money I wager. Apparently,
                   Subjective probability and Bayes'   theorem             77


the bet is very convenient, and the convenience increases with A\ But there
must be something wrong. This can be easily understood, considering the
limiting situation. If the offer were to be valid only on condition that I
gambled all my property, I would be crazy to accept it. This subjective
and non-linear perception of the value of money is well known. Other
complications arise because the effect of the occurrence of some events are
not simply money, as in example 2 of Sec. 3.6.
    We shall talk no further about decision in the rest of this book and
the reader interested to this subject can look into specialized literature,
e.g. Refs. [57,58]. However, I think it is important to separate probability
assessing from decision-taking issues. Probability assessment must be based
on a cool consideration of beliefs, under the normative rule of the coherent
bet, as if we really had to accept that bet in either direction and had an
infinite budget at our disposal. Subsequently decision issues will arise, and
their risks and benefits will then need to be properly taken into account.


3.10   Probability of hypotheses versus probability of obser­
       vations

In previous sections we have concentrated on the probability of hypothe­
ses in the light of past observations. We could also be interested in the
probability of future observations, for example the probability that our 'old
friend' from Sec. 3.6 will win the next game. As usual, we apply probability
rules:

               P(Wn+1 | Wn) = P(Wn+1 I C) ■ P(C I Wn)
                                   + P(Wn+1 I H) ■ P(H | Wn).             (3.27)

Let us see how this probability increases as a function of past wins (Ta­
ble 3.3). We also include in the same table the relative frequency of past
wins, as this could be an alternative way of calculating the probability (fre-
quentistic 'definition'): Little comment needs to be made about the pure
frequency based calculation of probability; do we really feel 100% confident
that our old friend will win again?
    Having made this rough comparison between frequentistic and Bayesian
methods for calculating the probability of future observations (for another,
more realistic, example of the evolution of probabilities of hypotheses and
observables, together with comparisons with the frequentistic approach,
see Ref. [29]), it is natural to ask for a comparison of their performance in
78             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical           introduction


                    Table 3.3 Probability that the 'old friend' will
                    win next time: Bayesian solution compared
                    with relative frequency. In the Bayesian solu­
                    tion the initial probability of 'cheat' is 5%.

                       n      P(Wn+1         | Wn)   f(Wn)   ^     P(Wn+1)
                                      (%)                    (%)
                       0              52.5                    —
                       1              54.8                   100
                       2              58.7                   100
                       3              64.7                   100
                       4              72.9                   100
                       5              81.4                   100
                       6              88.6                   100




calculating the probability of hypotheses. But this cannot be done, sim­
ply because the very concept of probability of hypotheses is prohibited in
the frequentistic approach. This would be no great problem if frequen­
tists refrained from assessing levels of confidence in hypotheses. But this
is not the case: frequentists deal with hypotheses by means of the popular
hypothesis-test scheme and use phrases which sound like degree of confi­
dence in hypotheses, although they say these phrases should not be con­
sidered as probabilistic statements. Needless to say, this kind of approach
generates confusion, as was pointed out in Sec. 1.8. 10


3.11     Choice of the initial probabilities (discrete case)

3.11.1     General         criteria
The dependence of Bayesian inferences on initial probability is considered
by opponents as the fatal flaw in the theory. But this criticism is less severe
than one might think at first sight. In fact:
  10
    Some say that Bayesian ideas are just philosophical irrelevances, because in practice
frequentistic "CL's" often coincide with Bayesian results. I think, however, that things
should be looked at the other way round. Frequentistic "CL's" are usually meaningless
unless they coincide with Bayesian results obtained under well-defined conditions. As an
outstanding example of this, I point to the case of two CL results, obtained by different
reactions, on the same physics quantity (the Higgs boson particle) given by the same
experimental teams using the same wording (Ref. [59], page 8). The two results have
completely different meanings, as is also stated in Ref. [60]. The lesson is that one must
always be very careful to be clear whether a frequentistic 95% CL result means "by
chance", a 95% confidence on a given statement, or something else.
                      Subjective probability and Bayes'   theorem                      79


  • It is impossible to construct a theory of uncertainty which is not af­
    fected by this "illness". Those methods which are advertised as being
    "objective" tend in reality to hide the hypotheses on which they are
    grounded. A typical example is the maximum likelihood method, of
    which we will discuss later.
  • As the amount of information increases the dependence on initial prej­
    udices diminishes.
  • When the amount of information is very limited, or completely lacking,
    there is nothing to be ashamed of if the inference is dominated by a
    priori assumptions.

It is well known to all experienced physicists that conclusions drawn from an
experimental result (and sometimes even the "result" itself!) often depend
on prejudices about the phenomenon under study. Some examples:

  • When doing quick checks on a device, a single measurement is usually
    performed if the value is "what it should be", but if it is not then many
    measurements tend to be made.
  • Results are sometimes influenced by previous results or by theoretical
    predictions. See for example Fig. 3.5 taken from the Particle Data
    Book [51]. The interesting book "How experiments end"[61] discusses,
    among others, the issue of when experimentalists are "happy with the
    result" and stop "correcting for the systematics".
  • Slight deviations from the background might be interpreted as a signal
    (e.g. as for the first claim of discovery of the top quark in spring '94),
    while larger 'signals' are viewed with suspicion if they are unwanted by
    the physics 'establishment' 11 .
  • Experiments are planned and financed according to the prejudices of
    the moment (for a delightful report see Ref. [63]).

These comments are not intended to justify unscrupulous behavior or sloppy
analysis. They are intended, instead, to remind us — if need be — that
scientific research is ruled by subjectivity much more than outsiders imag­
ine. The transition from subjectivity to "objectivity" begins when there is
a large consensus among the most influential people about how to interpret
the results 12 .
  11
     A case, concerning the search for electron compositeness in e+e"~ collisions, is dis­
cussed in Ref. [62].
  12
     "A theory needs to be confirmed by experiments.     But it is also true that an ex­
perimental result needs to be confirmed by a theory." This sentence expresses clearly
— though paradoxically — the idea that it is difficult to accept a result which is not
80                      Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical                               introduction


                       1200


                       1150 -

                       1100


          |            1050

           |           1000


                        950

                        900
                                                                                     fill.-
                        850      ' I '   LLi             I           1 1   1 1 1 1                    i               i

                               1950      1960       1970                   1980                1990              2000




                6        95



                6        90
           O    t/3




                         8 0   I 11 i    11     1 1 1 1 1 1 1   11            1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1       r 11       11


                               1950      1960       1970                   1980                1990              2000

     Fig. 3.5         Results on two physical quantities as a function of the publication date.
                     Subjective probability and Bayes'   theorem                  81


    In this context, the subjective approach to statistical inference at least
teaches us that every assumption must be stated clearly and all available
information which could influence conclusions must be weighed with the
maximum 'attempt at objectivity'. 13
    What are the rules for choosing the "right" initial probabilities? As one
can imagine, this is an open and debated question among scientists and
philosophers. My personal point of view is that one should avoid pedantic
discussion of the matter, because the idea of universally true priors reminds
me terribly of the famous "angels' sex" debates.
    If I had to give recommendations, they would be the following.

  • The a priori probability should be chosen in the same spirit as the
    rational person who places a bet, seeking to minimize the risk of losing.
  • General principles — like those that we will discuss in a while — may
    help, but since it may be difficult to apply elegant theoretical ideas in
    all practical situations, in many circumstances the guess of the "expert"
    can be relied on for guidance.
  • To avoid using as prior the results of other experiments dealing with the
    same open problem, otherwise correlations between the results would
    prevent all comparison between the experiments and thus the detection
    of any systematic errors.


3.11.2    Insufficient     reason and Maximum               Entropy
The first and most famous criterion for choosing initial probabilities is the
simple Principle of Insufficient Reason (or Indifference Principle): If there
is no reason to prefer one hypothesis over alternatives, simply attribute the
same probability to all of them. The indifference principle applied to coin
and die tossing, to card games or to other simple and symmetric problems,
yields to the well-known rule of probability evaluation that we have called
combinatorial. Since it is impossible not to agree with this point of view,
in the cases for which one judges that it does apply, the combinatorial
"definition" of probability is recovered in the Bayesian approach if the word
"definition" is simply replaced by "evaluation rule". We have in fact already
rationally justified.
     It may look paradoxical, but, due to the normative role of the coherent bet, the
subjective assessments are more objective about using, without direct responsibility,
someone else's formulae. For example, even the knowledge that somebody else has a
different evaluation of the probability is new information which must be taken into
account.
82            Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


used this reasoning in previous examples.
    A modern and more sophisticated version of the Indifference Principle
is the Maximum Entropy Principle. The information entropy function of n
mutually exclusive events, to each of which a probability pi is assigned, is
defined as [64]
                                                     n
                       H(pi,P2,...pn) = -K^pilnpi,                               (3.28)

with K a positive constant. The principle states that "in making inferences
on the basis of partial information we must use that probability distribu­
tion which has the maximum entropy subject to whatever is known, "[44].
Note that, in this case, "entropy" is synonymous with "uncertainty" 14 [44].
One can show that, in the case of absolute ignorance about the events JEj,
the maximization of the information uncertainty, with the constraint that
Y^i=\Pi — 1) yields the classical pi = 1/n (any other result would have
been worrying . . . ) .
    Although this principle is sometimes used in combination with the
Bayes formula for inferences (also applied to measurement uncertainty, see
Ref. [36]), it will not be used for applications in this book.


3.12      Solution to some problems

Here are the solutions to some of the examples discussed earlier.


3.12.1     AIDS     test
The AIDS test problem (Example 7 of Sec. 1.9) is a very standard one. Let
us solve it using the Bayes factor:
           P(HIV | Positive)       P(Positive I HIV) P 0 (HIV)
           P(HTV I Positive)       P(Positive | HTV) ' P(fflV)
                                    Wl
                                          "°-1/6°=500x           l
                                                                      ~   l
                                0.002          « 1              600       1.2
            P(HIV | Positive) = 45.5%.

Writing Bayes' theorem in this way helps a lot in understanding what is
going on. Stated in terms of signal to noise and selectivity (see problem 1
     14
   For one of the clearest illustrations about information entropy and uncertainty, see
Myron Tribus' "Rational descriptions, decisions and designs". [48]
                            Subjective probability and Bayes'   theorem                  83


in Sec. 3.5.4), we are in a situation in which the selectivity of the test is not
enough for the noisy conditions. So in order to be practically sure that the
patient declared 'positive' is infected, with this performance of the analysis,
one needs independent tests, unless the patient belongs to high-risk classes.
For example, a double independent analysis on an average person would
yield

                          P(HIV | Positivei n Positives) = 99.76% ,

similar 15 to that obtained in the case where a physician had a 'severe doubt'
[i.e. P 0 (HIV) w Po(HIV)] that the patient could be infected:

                         P(HIV | Positive, P 0 (fflV) « 0.5) = 99.80%.

We see then that, as discussed several times (see Sec. 10.8), the conclu­
sion obtained by arbitrary probability inversion is equivalent to assuming
uniform priors.
    Another interesting question, which usually worries those who approach
Bayesian methods for the first time, is the stability of the result. A variation
of a factor of two of the prior makes P(HIV | Positive) vary between 29%
and 63%.


3.12.2          Gold/silver      ring     problem
The three-box problem (Sec. 3.5.4) seems to be intuitive for some, but
not for everybody. Let us label the three boxes: A, Golden-Golden; B,
Golden-Silver; C, Silver-Silver. The initial probability (i.e. before having
checked the first ring) of having chosen the box A, B, or C is, by symmetry,
P0(A) = P0(B) = P0(C) = 1/3. This probability is updated after the event
E = 'the first ring extracted is golden' by Bayes' theorem:

   P(AlE)           =                      P(E\A)P0(A)
      k         ;
            '           P(E\A)P0(A)      + P(E\B)P0(B)          + P(E\C)P0(C)        '
   P(B\E\           =                      P(E\B)P0(B)
     V          ;
            '           P(E\A)P0(A)      + P(E\B)P0(B)          + P(E\C)P0(C)        '
   P(C\E)           =                      P(E\C)P0(C)
      V
            ' '         P{E\A)P0(A)      + P(E\B)P0(B)          +     P{E\C)P0(C)

where P(E | A), P(E | B) and P(E | C) are, respectively, 1, 1/2 and 0.
  15
     There is nothing profound in the fact that the two cases give very similar results. It
is just due to the numbers of these examples (i.e. 500 R* 600).
84           Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


   Finally, calling F = 'the next ring will be golden if I extract it from the
same box', we have, using the probability rules:


           P(F | E) = P(F\A, E) P(A\E) + P(F\B, E)               P(B\E)
                         +      P(F\C,E)P(C\E)
                      = 1 x 2 / 3 + 0 x 1 / 3 + 0 x 0 = 2/3.



3.12.3    Regular or double-head          coin?
In Sec. 1.1 we discussed that, even after having observed a long series
of heads when tossing a coin, we cannot be sure that that coin has two
heads (assuming we cannot inspect the coin). The Bayesian solution of the
problem is:


P(Double-head | n Heads)   P(n Heads | Double-head)               P0 (Double-head)
   P(Fair | n Heads)     ~      P(n Heads | Fair)                      P 0 (Fair)
                         _   1      P , (Double-head)
                         ~ (1/2)"        Po(Fair)
                                P0 (Double-head)
                              X
                                     Po(Fair)     '


The odd ratio in favor of the double-headed coin grows as 2™, but the abso­
lute probability depends on how much we initially believe this hypothesis.
To turn this problem into a standard 'non-subjective' text-book exercise,
we can imagine that the tossed coin was chosen at random from a box which
contained 100 coins, 99 of which were regular. The initial odd ratio is then
1/99: We need at least seven consecutive heads before we lose our initial
conviction that the coin is most likely regular.



3.12.4    Which random generator             is responsible     for the ob­
          served number?
The solution of the random generator example met in Sec. 1.9 requires a
limit to continuous variables and the use of p.d.f.'s (see Chapter 4), but it
                   Subjective probability and Bayes'    theorem                       85


is conceptually analogous to the discrete case:
         P(A\x)   =    f(x\A)      P(A)
                                                                              V        ;
         P(A\x)        f(x\A)     P(B)                                            "
                   =   ( V v ^ ^ ) exp[-(x - »A)2/(2<T2A)}        X   P(A)
                       (l/V^<rB)exp[-(x-fiB)y(2(T%)}                   P{B)
                       OB
                       — exp
                       &A
                             (x - [IB?
                                2a%
                                                (x -     HA)2
                                                       2a\        *m< (-)
which, for the particular case of the example {\IA = 0, HB = 6.02, a A =
oB = 1, P(A)/P(B) = 10 and x = 3.3), yields P(A | x)/P(B | x) = 1.75, i.e.
P(A | x) = 0.64 and P(B \ x) = 0.46. In the case of equiprobable generator
the solution would have been P(A \ x)/P(B | x) = 0.175, i.e. P{A \ x) = 0.15
and P(B \ x) = 0.85.


3.13   Some further examples showing the crucial role of
       background knowledge

Many exercises in probability text books are nothing but exercises in com­
binatorics or in measure theory, because the equiprobability of the elements
of the relevant space is usually implicit. It is obvious that in such exercises
the Bayesian approach cannot produce a solution which is different from
the standard solution, simply because we start from the same hypothesis of
equiprobability and from the same probability rules. As a consequence, the
Bayesian point of view might seem superficially a superfluous philosophical
construct. However, a person trained in the Bayesian approach is always
very careful to consider all hypotheses, both stated and unstated. A couple
of illuminating examples will remind us why it is essential to be very careful
about background knowledge and hidden hypotheses.

The three box problem(s). This is a well-known problem, which I have
   been told has caused a lot of discussion among fans of riddles. To better
   understand the logical traps involved, we will consider two variations
   on the problem. In both variations we have the presenter of a TV
   game-show and three identical boxes, only one of which contains a rich
   prize.
   (1) In the first case, imagine two contestants, each of whom chooses one
       box at random. Contestant B opens his chosen box and finds it does
       not contain the prize. Then the presenter offers player A the oppor-
86             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


         tunity to exchange his box, still un-opened, with the third box. Is
         the offer to his advantage, disadvantage, or indifferent?
         Solution. It is "clearly" indifferent, as there is no reason for prefer­
         ring either one or the other of the two remaining unopened boxes.
     (2) In the second case there is only one contestant, A. After he has
         chosen one box the presenter tells him that, although the boxes
         are identical, he knows which one contains the prize. Then he says
         that, out of the two remaining boxes, he will open one that does
         not contain the prize. The presenter gets a box, opens it, and the
         box turns out to be empty. Then, as in the previous problem, he
         offers the contestant the opportunity to exchange his box with the
         remaining third box.
         Solution. "Obviously", this time it is to the contestant's advantage
         to take the third box. In fact the probability of finding the prize in
         it amounts to the probability that the prize was in one of the two
         remaining boxes before the presenter chose one, opened it, and found
         it to be empty: 2/3.
      These problems seem paradoxical to many people, because the physical
      action is exactly the same: one box was found to be empty while the
      other two boxes were still un-opened. But the status of information
      is quite different in the two cases: In the first, contestant B chose an
      empty box by (unlucky) chance. In the second, the presenter chose an
      empty box on purpose.
      Formally, we can write the two conditions as C^ = EB and C^ =
      EBL)Ec, where EA, EB and Ec are the events "prize in box A", "prize
      in box B", "prize in box C". Using Eq. (3.9) we have for case (1):

           P(EA\C^)          P(EA\EB)       =   P(EB\EA)         J_       3             „
                                                                                l
             P(EA)              P(EA)             P(EB)          2/3      2         ^       '

     and, hence, P(EA | C^) = 1/2. Instead, in case (2) the condition C^
     corresponds to the certain event, as can be easily understood (C^ =
     ~EBL)EC = EBr\Ec      = 0 = fi). As a consequence, P(EA | C (2) ) is not
     updated with respect to the initial value of 1/3 (no real new information
     is available!).
     There are further interesting variations on the game.
     (3) Contestant A might not trust the presenter, believing that it was
         pure chance that he was able to predict what the box contained.
         Given this belief, we recover precisely the first case, and the prob-
                   Subjective probability and Bayes'   theorem              87


       ability we assign to the prize being in the third box goes back to
       1/2.
   (4) We can complicate the problem still further, introducing a "degree
       of mistrust" in the presenter, i.e a probability of bluff pb = P(bluff).
       Using the probability rules, namely Eq. 3.10, and calling E the event
       "the prize is in the third box", we get

                       P[E | / ) = P(E | bluff, I) P(bluff | I)
                                  + P{E | bluff, I) F(bluff | I)         (3.33)
                                   1     2,
                                 = ^Pb +-^{l ~ Pb)

                                 = \-\p     b   .                        (3.34)

       We have a smooth transition between the two solutions, depending
       on pi,. Nevertheless, accepting the offer to exchange boxes is never
       a bad decision.
The two envelope "paradox". Let us consider another problem which
   has no reasonable solution within standard probability, and hence is
   known as a paradox. As in the previous example, we will consider
   various ways of formulating the problem in order to highlight the logical
   mistake which gives rise to the "paradox".
   (1) Imagine that someone shows you two envelopes and tells you that
       they each contain one check, but that the value of one of these
       checks is double the value of the other (though the exact amount
       of money involved is initially unknown). You choose one envelope,
       see the check, and then you are given the opportunity to exchange
       envelopes. Is it to your advantage to do so?
       Standard solution: yes it is to your advantage, because you might
       find in the other envelope half or twice the amount of money you
       read on the first check — let us call it A. If it is half, you will
       lose A/2 (= -A + A/2). Otherwise you will gain A (= -A + 2 A).
       'Therefore' it is to your advantage to exchange envelopes. But this
       argument is already valid before the first envelope is opened, and
       can be repeated after the envelopes have been exchanged, and this
       certainly is a paradox.
   (2) Now let us take the same problem, but with a couple of variations.
       First, imagine that the game is real and is played among normal
       students. Second, let us say that the ratio of values between the two
88            Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


         checks is 100. A student opens the first envelope and finds 100 dol­
         lars. 16 What should the student do? Yes, you are right, he should
         keep the check: he has no chance of finding $10000 in the other en­
         velope.
         Solution of the paradox: the origin of the paradox lies in consid­
         ering the two hypotheses equiprobable. If this was reasonable to do
         so, then the expected value of gain G in problem (1) would be

                    E(G) = l(-A       + A/2) + l(-A       + 2A) =       \A.

         Extending the reasoning to the second problem, E(G) would be
         about 49A. But now the situation becomes so extreme that the
         hidden hypothesis of the 'standard solution' becomes plain to every­
         body's eyes.
     (3) Consider now a third case, again among normal students, but this
         time with a factor of 10 between the values of the two checks. A
         student, one who knows the person who has prepared the envelopes
         well, finds A = $10 and has serious doubts about whether to ex­
         change. How much does he believe he will find a check for $100 in
         the other envelope?
         Solution: since he finds himself in a status of indifference, the ex­
         pected gain is about zero. It follows that he considers the chance
         of finding 1/10A much higher than the chance of finding 10A, such
         that the ratio of probabilities (the odds) compensates the ratio of
         possible gains. This means that he unconsciously assigns a proba­
         bility of about 9% to finding $100 in the unopened envelope (the
         exact solution is 1/(1 + r), where r is the prize ratio).
Moral. It is always very dangerous to calculate probabilities in a way which
  does not take into account a real or realistic situation and includes the
  full status of information about facts and/or persons involved. I do not
  know of any paradoxical problem which involves real people, in real
  situations, handling real money. As de Finetti used to said, "either
  probability refers to real events or it is nothing".



  16
    The real life envelopes that I prepare for students contain 1000 lire (about half a
dollar) and 1 lira. When somebody finds 1000 lire and decides to exchange envelopes,
I ask: "Do you really think I have come here today prepared to losing one million lire
with 50% probability?"
                                 Chapter 4

              Probability distributions
                (a concise reminder)


In the following chapters it will be assumed that the reader is familiar with
random variables, distributions, probability density functions, and expected
values, as well as with the most frequently used distributions. This chapter
is only intended as a summary of concepts and as a presentation of the
notation used in the subsequent sections.


4.1   Discrete variables

Uncertain numbers are numbers in respect of which we are in a condition
of uncertainty. They can be the number associated with the outcome of a
die, to the number which will be read on a scale when a measurement is
performed, or to the numerical value of a physics quantity. In the sequel,
we will call uncertain numbers also "random variables", to come close to
what physicists are used to, but one should not think, then, that "random
variables" are only associated with the outcomes of repeated experiments,
or to some idealistic, but of no practical relevance, definition of 'random­
ness' [54]. Stated simply, to define a random variable X means to find a rule
which allows a real number to be related univocally (but not necessarily bi-
univocal) to an event (E). One could write this expression X(E). Discrete
variables assume a countable range, finite or not. We shall indicate the
variable with X and its numerical realization x; and differently from other
notations, the symbol x (in place of n or k) is also used for discrete variables.




                                       89
90            Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical     introduction


Probability function

     To each possible value of X we associate a degree of belief:

                                       f(x) = P(X = x).                            (4.1)

     f(x), being a probability, must satisfy the following properties:

                       0 < f(Xi) < 1,                                              (4.2)
                       P(X = XiUX            = Xj) = f(xi) + f{xj),               (4.3)
                       £/(*;) = !•                                                 (4-4)
                            i

Cumulative distribution function

                            F(xk) = P(X <xk)=           J2 /(**) •                 (4-5)

     Properties:

                   F(-oo)       = 0,                                               (4.6)
                   F(+oo) = 1,                                                     (4.7)
                   F{Xi) - Fixi-i)       = f(Xi),                                  (4.8)
                   lim F(x + t) = F(x)              (right side continuity).       (4.9)

Expected value (mean)

                                  H = E(X) = ^2xif{xi).                           (4.10)
                                                    i

     In general, given a function g(X) of X ,

                                  E\g(X)] = '£ig(xi)f(xi).                        (4.11)
                                                i

     E(-) is a linear operator:

                                  E(aX + b) = aE(X) + b.                          (4.12)

Variance and standard deviation

     Variance:

                    a2 = Var(X) = E[(X - n)2} = E(X 2 ) -             M
                                                                          2
                                                                              ■   (4.13)
               Probability distributions     (a concise   reminder)                              91


   Standard deviation:

                                         a = Vo^.                                         (4.14)

   Transformation properties:

                          Var(aX + b) = a2 Var(X),                                        (4.15)
                               a{aX + b) = \a\ a(X).                                      (4.16)

Moments

   Expected value and variance are particular cases of moments. In gen­
   eral,

                                        E[(X - c)r]                                       (4.17)

   defines a moment of order r about c of a probability distribution. If
   c is not mentioned, c = 0 is implicit and one simply talks of moment
   of order r. Moments about c = E(X) are called central moments.
   Expected value is the first order moment, variance the second order
   central moment.

Binomial distribution

   X ~ B„tP (hereafter "~" stands for "follows"); BHtP stands for binomial
   with parameters n and p:

                                                               (n =          l,2,...,oo

                                                               I   Jb   V/j J-j ■ ■ - j / i

                                                                                          (4.18)
   Expected value, standard deviation and variation coefficient:

                                fj, = np,                                                     (4-19)
                                a = y/np(l-p),                                            (4.20)

                         V=°        =    V"P(1-P)_<X         1                            (4.21)
                               p,            np             y/n

   1 — p is often indicated by q.
92              Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


Poisson distribution
   X~VX:


                     n*™=xi'-> {inr.                                ,00
                                                                                 (4.22)

       Expected value, standard deviation and variation coefficient:

                                          H = A,                                 (4.23)
                                          (7 = V%                                (4.24)
                                               1                                 (4.25)
                                          v = —p=..
Binomial —> Poisson

                                   &n,p              > P\ ■
                                          n -> oo
                                          p->0
                                          (np = A)


4.2      Continuous variables: probability and probability den­
         sity function

Moving from discrete to continuous variables there are the usual problems
with infinite possibilities, similar to those found in Zeno's "Achilles and
the tortoise" paradox. In both cases the answer is given by infinitesimal
calculus. But some comments are needed:

     • The probability of each of the realizations of X is zero (P(X = x) = 0);
       but this does not mean that each value is impossible, otherwise it would
       be impossible to get any result.
     • Although all values x have zero probability, one usually assigns different
       degrees of belief to them, quantified by the probability density function
       (p.d.f.) f(x). Writing f(xi) > /(a^), for example, indicates that our
       degree of belief in xi is greater than that in X2-
     • The probability that a random variable lies inside a finite interval, for
       example P(a < X < b), is instead finite. If the distance between a
       and b becomes infinitesimal, then the probability becomes infinitesimal
       too. If all the values of X have the same degree of belief (and not only
       equal numerical probability P(x) — 0) the infinitesimal probability is
       simply proportional to the infinitesimal interval dP = kdx. In the
                 Probability distributions    (a concise          reminder)                 93



    general case the ratio between two infinitesimal probabilities around
    two different points will be equal to the ratio of the degrees of belief in
    the points (this argument implies the continuity of f(x) on either side
    of the values). It follows that dP = f(x) dx and then

                           P(a < X < b) = f f(x) dx.                                    (4.26)
                                                       Ja

 • f(x) has a dimension inverse to that of the random variable.
After this short introduction, here is a list of definitions, properties and
notations:
Cumulative distribution function

                       F{x) = P(X < x) = f                       f(x') dx',             (4.27)
                                                        J — OO

    or

                                     /<*> - ^                                           «*>
Properties of f(x) and F(x)
    • fix) > 0 ,
    • J^f(x)dx = l,
    • 0 < F(x) < 1,
    . P(a < X < b) = Jba f(x) dx = Jt^ f{x) dx - J^                           f{x) dx = Fib) -
      F(a),
    • if x 2 > x\ then F(x 2 ) > F{x\),
    • l i m ^ - o o F{x) = 0,
      lim^-^+oo F(x) = 1.
Expected value of continuous variable distributions
                                               + oo
                                             r -t-oo
                                                       x fix) Ax,                       (4.29)
                                         /   -OO
                                              +oo
                                         /             gix)fix)Ax.                      (4.30)
                                              -OO
94                 Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical           introduction


Uniform distribution

         X    ~K.{a,b):.   1


                                                      1
                               f(x\IC(a,b))                     (a < x < b),                (4.31)
                                                     b— a
                                                     x—a
                               F(x\K,(a,b))        =                                        (4.32)
                                                     b— a
         Expected value and standard deviation:
                                        a +b
                                   M                                                        (4.33)
                                        b-a _           (b-a)/2
                                                                                            (4.34)
                                        v/12             V3           y/3'
Normal (Gaussian) distribution
   X~tf(jji,a):

                                                                              -00 < fl < + 0 0
                                              ex
             f(x\M^,a))                            P - ' r, V
                                                            < 0 < cr < oo
                                                            2                ,
                                 /2ira           2(7
                                                               -oo < x < +oo
                                                                          (4.35)
         where /z and a (both real) are the expected value and standard devia­
         tion, 2 respectively. In the normal distribution mean, mode and median
         concide. Moreover, it can be easily proved that the variance is related
         to the second derivative of the exponent by
                                         d2ln/(z)                 1
                                                                                            (4.36)
                                           dx2

         These observations are very important in applications, when f(x) can
         have a very complicated mathematical expression, but, nevertheless,
         has approximately a Gaussian shape: expected value and variance can
         be estimated from the mode and Eq. (4.36), respectively. That is,
         evaluations that involve integration are replaced by evaluations that
         involve differentiation, a usually easier task.

     x
     The symbols of the following distributions have the parameters within parentheses
to indicate that the variables are continuous.
   2
     Mathematicians and statisticians prefer to take cr2, instead of cr, as second param­
eter of the normal distribution. Here the standard deviation is preferred, since it is
homogeneous to fi and it has a more immediate physical interpretation. So, one has to
pay attention to be sure about the meaning of expressions like A/"(0.5, 0.8).
                 Probability distributions       (a concise   reminder)                95


Standard normal distribution
   This is the name given to the particular normal distribution of mean 0
   and standard deviation 1, usually indicated by Z:
                                     Z ~ Af(0,1).                                (4.37)
Exponential distribution




                 F{t\S{T))      = l-e~tlT.                                       (4.39)
    We use the symbol t instead of x because this distribution will be
    applied to the time domain.
    Survival probability.

                       P{T>t)      = l-F(t\£{T))=e-t/T.                          (4.40)

    Expected value and standard deviation:

                                             fj, = T                             (4.41)
                                             a = T.                              (4.42)
    The parameter r has the physical meaning of (expected) lifetime.

Poisson -O- E x p o n e n t i a l
   The Poisson and exponential distribution represent two aspects of the
   Poisson process. If X (= "number of counts during the time At")
   is Poisson distributed then T (= "interval of time to wait — starting
   from any instant! — before the first count is recorded") is exponentially
   distributed:

                    X~f(x\Px)                ^          T~f(t\£(T))              (4.43)
                                       (r = MI) .                                (4.44)
    Also the gamma distribution is related to the Poisson process: for c
    integer it describes the waiting time before c counts are recorded.

Gamma distribution
  X ~ Gamma(c, r):

         /(xlGammatcr))^/-^-"                                    ( *"'■! « ° >   ( 4 - 45 )
                                    r(c)                          ix> o
96           Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical         introduction


     where
                                           /•OO

                                T(c) = /              x'^e-'dx
                                       Jo
     (for n integer, T(n + 1) = n\). c is called shape parameter, while 1/r is
     the scale parameter. Expected value, variance and mode are

                                E(X) = -                                            (4.46)
                                       r
                               Var(X) = 4                                           (4-47)

                           mode(X) = l°*C<1                      .                  (4.48)
                                             k    r         —

     If c is integer, the distribution is also known as Erlang, describing
     the time to be waited before observing c events in a Poisson process of
     intensity r (events per unit of time). For c = 1 the Gamma distribution
     recovers the exponential.

Chi-square distribution
   The well known x2 distribution with v degrees of freedom is formally
   nothing but a Gamma distribution with c = v/2 and r = 1/2:

                       / ( z | x * ) = /(z|Gamma(i//2,l/2))
                                         9-172
                                                  xul2-le-x'2.                      (4.49)
                                     I>/2)
     Expected value, variance and mode follow from Eqs. (4.46)-(4.48):

                               E{X) = v                                             (4.50)
                            Var(X) = 2v                                             (4.51)

                          modem = {°                ^ < l      .                    (4.52)
                                                  - 2 if v > 2

     Note that the xt distribution can be obtained as sum of v independent
     standardized Gaussian quantities:
                                                      V

                       Zi~tf     (0,1)     =*         $>?-;£■                       (4-53)


     In data analysis the Pearson x 2 is also well-known, given by Eq. (4.92).
                 Probability distributions     (a concise   reminder)       97


Beta distribution
   X ~Beta(r,s)):

                                                                        (454)
       /(,|Beta(r,S)) = ^ - ( l - , ) -                         { ^ ^

    The denominator is just for normalization, i.e.


                         P{r,s)=      [              xr-1(l-x)'-1dx.
                                     Jo
    Indeed this integral defines the beta function, resulting in

                                                r(r)r(«)
                                 p{r,s)         T(r + s)

    Since the beta distribution is not very popular among physicists, but
    very interesting for inferential purposes as conjugate distribution of the
    binomial, we show in Fig. 4.1 the variety of shapes that it can assume
    depending on the parameters r and s. Expected value and variance
    are:

                           E(X) = -^—                                   (4.55)
                                   r +s
                                           VS
                          Var(X) = -.       —        rrr.               (4.56)
                                   (r + s + 1) (r + s) 2
    If r > 1 and s > 1 the mode is unique, equal to (r — l ) / ( r + s — 2).

Triangular distribution
    A convenient distribution for a rough description of subjective uncer­
   tainty on the value of influence quantities ('systematic effects') is given
   by the triangular distribution. This distribution models beliefs which
   decrease linearly in either side of the maximum (x0) up to x0 + Ax+
   on the right side and x0 - Ax- on the left side (see Fig. 8.1). Expected
   value and variance are given by

                                          Ax
                      E(X) =x0+              +~Ax-                      (4.57)

                     a2{x)=A*x++^;+Ax+Ax^                               (458)
                                                     18
    In the case of a symmetric triangular distribution (Ax+ = Aa;_ = Ax)
98             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical          introduction


      we get
                                             E(X) = x0                                 (4.59)

                                             *P0 = ^ § .                               (4-60)

4.3    Distribution of several random variables

We only consider the case of two continuous variables (X and Y). The
extension to more variables is straightforward. The infinitesimal element of
probability is dF(x, y) = f(x, y) dx dy, and the probability density function



The probability of finding the variable inside a certain area A is


                                     I'
                                     A
                                         r
                                          f(x,y)dxdy.                                  (4.62)


Marginal distributions

                                 fx(x)         = jf(x,y)dy,                            (4.63)

                                 fv(y) = Jf(x,y)dx.                                    (4.64)

      The subscripts X and Y indicate that fx(%) and fy{y) are only func­
      tions of X and Y, respectively (to avoid fooling around with different
      symbols to indicate the generic function), but in most cases we will
      drop the subscripts if the context helps in resolving ambiguities.

Conditional distributions
                          / / i \  f(z,y)                      f(x,y)                   ,     .
                         fx{x]y) =                                                     (4 65)
                                             jv^ = m^>                                   -

                            f(x,y)       = fx(x\y)fy(y)                                (4.67)
                                         = fY(y\x)fx(x).                                (4.68)
Independent random variables

                                 f(x,y)         = fx(x)fY(y)                           (4.69)
                 Probability distributions     (a concise   reminder)       99


   (it implies fx(x   \ y) = fx(x)     and fY(y | x) = fY(y) )•

Bayes' theorem for continuous random variables

                           f{h]e)=               f(e\h)fh(h)
                                                                        (4.70)
                                          Jf(e\h)fh(h)dh

   (See proof in Section 2.7.)

Expected value

                         Hx = E(X) = jx             f(x, y) dx Ay       (4.71)

                                             = fxfx(x)dx,               (4.72)

   and analogously for Y. In general

                      E[g(X, Y)] = Jg(x, y) f(x, y) dx dy .             (4.73)

Variance:

                  a\ = E[((X - E(X)f]              = E(X2) - E 2 (X),   (4.74)

   and analogously for Y. In practice, expected value and variance are
   equal to those calculated only considering the variable of interest.

Covariance

                  Cov(X,Y)=E[(X-                 E(X)) ■ (Y - E(Y))]     (4.75)
                                 = E{XY) - E(X) ■ E(Y).                  (4.76)

   If X and Y are independent, then E(XY) = E(X) ■ E(Y) and hence
   Cov(X,Y) = 0 (the opposite is true only if X, Y ~ Af(-)). Note also
   that, if Y = X, then Cov(X, Y) = Var(X).

Correlation coefficient



                                          C
                                      =        = ! a .                  (4.78)
                                               ax aY

                                     (-1<P<1)
100                      Bayesian         reasoning in data analysis: A critical                      introduction




      A)     r = s = l , 1.1 e 0.9                               B ) r--= s = 2 , 3, 4, 5
                                                                               £
                                                                     2.5
       1.4

       1.2   \                                                             2

         1
                                                                      1.5
       0.8   /                                       \
       0.6                                                                 1

       0.4
                                                                     0.5
       0.2

                                                             X
                                                                               /   #                          \      \
                   0.2      0.4     0.6      0.8         1                          0.2        0.4    0.6    0.8         1 ' *




      C ) r = s = 0 . 8 , 0.5, 0.2, 0.1                          D ) r = 0.8; s = 1 . 2 , 1.5, 2, 3
         3                                                                 4




             L J
                                                                     3.5
       2.5
                                                                           3
         2
                                                                     2.5

       1.5                                                                 2

                                                                     1.5
         1
                                                                           1
       0.5       V^,~"                      ",-'/'                   0.5

                                                             X
                   0.2      0.4     0.6      0.8         1                          0.2        0.4    0.6    0.8         1 "




      E)     s   = 0.8; r = 1 . 2 , 1.5, 2, 3                    F ) s == 2; r = 0 . 8 , 0.6, 0.4, 0.2
                                                                               E

         4                                                                 4

       3.5                                                           3.5

         3                                                                 3

       2.5                                                           2.5

         2                                                                 2

       1.5                                                            l.S

         1                                                                 1

       0.5                                                            0.5

                                                             X
                   0.2      0.4     0.6      0.8         1                          0.2        0.4    0.6    0.8     1       "




      G ) (r,      S   ) = (3,5), ( 5 , 5 ) , (5,3)              H ) (r, s) = (30,50), ( 5 0 , 5 0 ) , (50,30)
       2.5
                                                                       8
         2

                                                                       6
                                                                                              ' > / \ '^
       1.5


         1
                                                                       4
                                                                                          / '/ V (
                                                                       2                  /     A '\ *
       0.5                                                                 [
                   0.2      0.4     0.6      0.8         1   X
                                                                                   0.2
                                                                                         /' J \ \ \
                                                                                              0.4    0.6    0.8      1 "




Fig. 4.1 E x a m p l e s of B e t a distributions for some values of r a n d s. T h e p a r a m ­
eters in bold refer t o continuous curves.
                      Probability distributions      (a concise   reminder)                         101


Covariance matrix and correlation matrix
   Given n random quantities X, the covariance matrix V is defined as

                            Vij =                    E[(Xi-E(Xi))-(Xj-E(Xj))},                   (4.79)

   where the diagonal terms are the variances and the off-diagonal ones
   are the covariances. It is also convenient to define a correlation matrix,
   given by p(Xi,Xj).    The diagonal terms of the correlation matrix are
   equal to unity.

Bivariate normal distribution
   Joint probability density function of X and Y with correlation coeffi­
   cient p (see Fig. 4.2):

                                                                1               (X - / i x ) 2
               f(x,y) =                               exp< -
                            2lTO-X(Jy A / 1 - P2             2(1-P2)
                                                                   -/v>2n
                                                                       21
                                    (x - fix){y - Hy)             {y-
                             -2p                                                                 (4.80)
                                          l
                                           x   u
                                                y
                                                            +      "5     Jj
    Marginal distributions:

                                         X ~          N(px,ax),                                  (4.81)
                                         Y~Af(tiy,ay).                                           (4.82)

    Conditional distribution:

                                                          (y - [Vy+PlZ (x° ~ Ar)J)
     f(y\x0)      =                            exp
                       /2nav       A/1 - p2                         2a2(l-p2)
                                                                                                 (4.83)
    i.e.


                      Vi,     ■AT (fly + P — ( l o ~ / i x ) , O-yA/ 1 - P 2 j •                 (4- 84)


    The condition X = a;0 squeezes the standard deviation and shifts the
    mean of Y.

Multi-variate normal distribution
  The extension to n random variables X is given by

                                                                  1 J
                      f{x) = (27r)^ n / 2 |V|- 1 / 2 exp          -A V-'A                        (4.85)
102   Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical                      introduction




                                                                            1             1           1
                                            .f(xly)
                                                                            l

                                                                                \ ;
                                                                                          !

                                                                                              • ■
                                                                                                      1

                                                                                                          \
                                                                                                                      f)
                                                                                ; \           1 '.
                                                                                '•    \       ■   \           \
                                                                       I

                                                                   /
                                                                   /
                                                                   f
                                                               l                      ' 1
                                                           i                          '\
                                                                                     ' \ \
                                                       l
                                                                                                  \               \
                                                   i
                                                   /

                                                           0


        Fig. 4.2   Example of bivariate normal distribution.
                Probability distributions    (a concise   reminder)        103


    where A stands for the vector of differences Xi — \n and |V| is the
    determinant of the covariance matrix V. It is easy to show that the
    Hessian of the logarithm of f(x) is related to the inverse of the covari­
    ance matrix:

                               02 lnf{x)
                                                  = {V-l)ij.            (4.86)
                                dxidxj

Multinomial distribution
  It is the extension of the binomial to the case of many possibilities (m),
  each with probability pi:


                  ^X^Mnp) = , , , ? ' - , # # • • • * & - .             (4-87)
    where x is the set of variables {x\ ,X2, ■ ■ ■, xm} and p the set of prob­
    abilities {pi, P2, ■ ■ ■, Pm} • For m = 2 the binomial distribution is re­
    covered. Expected value and variance are given by

                                E{Xi) =nPi                              (4.88)
                              Vax(Xi)=npi(l-pi).                        (4.89)

    All variables are correlated. Covariances and correlation coefficients
    are given by

                     Cov(X i ,X j ) = -npiPj                            (4.90)

                         p(Xi,Xj)       =      1    PiPj                (4.91)
                                              V(i-Pi)(i-Pi)"

    In the binomial case x\ and X2 are 100% anticorrelated, due the con­
    straint X2 = n — x\. Note that the covariance matrix is singular, as any­
    body who has tried to calculate the x 2 as A T V _ 1 A will have realized
    with disappointment. Nevertheless, Pearson proved that the quantity


                                    f       (*«-"**)'                  (4.92)

    behaves like a xl variable [Eq. (4.49)] with v = m - 1 if all npi are
    'large enough' (see Ref. [37] for details). The summation (4.92) is called
    Pearson-^ 2 .
104            Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical    introduction


4.4    Propagation of uncertainty

The general problem is, given many (final) variables Yj which depend on
other (initial) variables Xi, to calculate f(y) from the knowledge of f(x),
according to the following scheme:

         /(ari,x 2 ,...,a;„)                    —» / (2/1,3/2, • ■ • ,ym) •          (4.93)
                               r,'=rj(Ai,A2,...,A„)


This calculation can be quite challenging, and it is often performed by
Monte Carlo techniques.

General solution for discrete variables
   The probability of a given Y = y is equal to the sum of the probability
   of each Xi such that Y(x) = y, where Y() stands for the mathematical
   function relating X and Y. The extension to many variables is also
   straightforward. For example, if the uncertainty about X\ and X2
   is modelled by the two-dimensional probability function f(xi,x2)   and
   the quantities Y\ and Y2 are related to them by the functions Y\ =
   Yi(X\,X2)   and Y2 = Y2(X\, X2), the probability function of Y\ and Y2
   will be

                           /(!/i,J/ 2 )=              E   f(xi,x2)                 (4.94)
                                                  xx,x2
                                             Yi(xi,x2)    = yj
                                             Yz(xi,x2)     =y2.

General solution for continuous variables
   To deal with continuous variables we need to replace sums by integrals,
   and the constraints by suitable Dirac delta functions. Equation (4.94)
   will be replaced, then, by

       f(yi,V2) =      S(y1 -Yi(xi,x2))5(y2                   -Y2(x1,y2))f(xi,x2)dx1dx2.
                                                                        (4.95)
      A simple example of application of this formula is given in Fig. 4.3,
      where Y = X\ + X2, with Xi and X2 independent variables dis­
      tributed according to an asymmetric triangular distribution (self-defi­
      ned in Fig. 4.3). Note that the distribution parameters which matter
      in the propagation are expected value and standard deviation, ruled
      by Eqs. (4.98)-(4.99). There is, instead, no probability theory theorem
      which gives a simple propagation rule of mode, median and probability
                      Probability distributions (a concise reminder)                        105



               E(X)             =     0.17                  E(Y)           =   0.34
               a(X)             =     0.42                  <r{Y)          =   0.59
               mode             =     0.5                   mode           =   0.45
               median           =     0.23                  median         =   0.37




                          0.8


                          0.1
                                V\                                   0.8


                                                                     0.6


                          A,4                                        0/4


                      /   0.2                                    /   0.2



      2x
                                1
                                    ■ ■ ■ ■    — V .   -2   -1                   1
                 -1                                                                   2
                                                 r'

Fig. 4.3 Distribution of the sum of two independent quantities, each described
by an asymmetric triangular p.d.f. with xo = 0.5, Ax+ = 0.5 and Ax_ = 1.5 (see
Fig. 8.1 for the parameters of triangular distributions). The p.d.f. of Y = X\ +X2
was calculated using Eq. (4.95). Note that E(Xi + X2) = E ( X i ) + E(X2) and
a2(Xi+X2)      = a2(Xi) + o-2(X2), while, in general, m o d e ( X i + X 2 ) # mode(Xi) +
mode(X2).

    intervals. The simpler, better known, text book transformation formu­
    lae using the Jacobian are recovered using the properties of the delta
    function. For example, in the case of only one initial variable, and one
    final variable Eq. (4.95) reduces to


                                              * w = iS$r                                  (496)
    Some simple examples, starting from a uniform fx{%) are shown in
    Fig. 4.4. In the practical cases Eqs. (4.94-4.95) can be difficult to
    solve, and in many cases Monte Carlo methods are used, as suggested
    by the structure of the formulae (see also Sec. 2.10.2). For an example
    of application see Fig. 4.5.

Approximate solution
   The solution becomes quite easy under the following conditions: there
   is a linear relation between X and Y; we are interested only in expected
   values, variances and covariances. This situation can be sketched in the
106               Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical          introduction




                                                                       A
      "\                                                                                  B
           V             C ;
                                                                                          K
                         ^p^iirriii^iizi^ii^:
        ..-,----",""',    i    ;   ,   ,    i    ,   .   ,    i    .   ,       I

                         0.2               0.4               0.6                    x, y

Fig. 4.4 Examples of variable changes starting from a uniform distribution ("K"): A)
Y = 0.5 X + 0.25; B) Y = y/X; C) Y = X2; D) Y = XA. The dots projected on the
two axes of the frames give a visual idea of the probability density functions inversely
proportional to the slope of the function.
                 Probability distributions                  (a concise         reminder)                   107


following way:

        f EpQ)                                                                         f E(Yj)


Linear combinations of random variables
   If Y = ^TV CiXi, with Cj real, then:

             HY = E(F) = £                  a E(Xi) = Y,Ci fa,                                          (4.98)
                                   i                                i

           aY = Var(r) = £                  c? Var(Xi) + 2 ^                     Ci   c,- Cov(Xi, Xj)
                                   i                                      i<3
                                            c
                             = £            * Var(Xi) + ^                 C i Cj         Cov(Xi,Xj)
                                   i                                    i¥=i
                                                            1 /                a
                                                                   Pij C-i Cj Gi i
                                   i

                             — /        J   Pij Ci Cj (Ji Oj
                                   ij

                                                          Oij.                                          (4.99)
                                   ij

    aY has been written in different ways, with increasing levels of com­
    pactness, which can be found in the literature. In particular, we use
    the notations er^- = Cov(Xi,Xj) = p^ Oi Oj and an = of.
    The above results are easily extended to many final variables, but we
    need to also evaluate correlation coefficients among the Yj. Given Yk =
    J2ickiXi, it follows

         aYkl = Cov(Yk,Yt)         = J2 Cki CM Var(Xi)                                                  (4.100)
                                                i

                                            + £(cfci cij + ckj en) Co\{Xi,                       Xj)
                                                    i<3

                                   = £               Cki Cu O? + ^ ( C f c i Clj + Ckj Cu) Oij
                                                i                          i<j

                                                     C      C                    Cki
                                   = 2_j ki H °f + /2                                  °li aiJ
                                                i                         i^tj

                                   = ^2ckiCij(Tij.                                                      (4.101)
108                 Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


          Indeed, this result also contains Eq. (4.99), as a special case in which
          k = I. Equation (4.100) shows that, even if the input quantities Xi
          are independent, several Yj, become correlated if they depend on the
          same Xi. Note that signs are important, and compensations might oc­
          cur. Therefore it is important to take correlations with care. Equation
          (4.101) can be rewritten as oykl = Y^a cki °~tj cij, m order to stress its
          matrix form:

                                        Vy = C V x C T ,                             (4.102)

          where Vx and Vy are the covariance matrices of X and Y, respec­
          tively, and C is the coefficient matrix.

Linearization
   Many functions can be linearized,3 and hence all previous results are
   recovered, if the derivatives dYk/dXi\^,x, (= cki) are approximately con­
   stant in a range of a few standard deviations around E ( X ) . The physics
   meaning of the derivatives Cki is that of sensitivity coefficients.

The properties seen in this section are general properties of probability
theory, and do not depend on the p.d.f. of X. However, these properties
say little about the probability function of Y. Fortunately, the central limit
theorem helps us in many cases of practical interest.


4.5         Central limit theorem

4.5.1          Terms     and role
The well-known central limit theorem plays a crucial role in statistics and
justifies the enormous importance that the Gaussian distribution has in
many practical applications (this is why it appeared on 10 DM notes).
    We have reminded ourselves in Eqs. (4.98)-(4.99) of the expression of
the mean and variance of a linear combination of random variables,
                                               n
                                        Y = J2aXi,

in the most general case, which includes correlated variables (pij ^ 0). In
the case of independent variables the variance is given by the simpler, and
      3
          Next to linear order approximation is discussed in Chapter 12.
                  Probability distributions   (a concise   reminder)             109


better known, expression

                                    2
                    4 = E ^ ,                   (Pii=0,i1tj).                (4.103)
                            i=\

This is a very general statement, valid for any number and kind of variables
(with the obvious clause that all <Tj must be finite), but it does not give
any information about the probability distribution of Y. Even if all Xi
follow the same distributions f(x), f{y) is different from f(x), with some
exceptions, one of these being the normal.
     The central limit theorem states that the distribution of a linear combi­
nation Y will be approximately normal if the variables Xi are independent
and a\ is much larger than any single component c?of from a non-normally
distributed Xi. The last condition is just to guarantee that there is no sin­
gle random variable which dominates the fluctuations. The accuracy of
the approximation improves as the number of variables n increases (the
theorem says "when n —> oo"):


         n^oo^Y-tfl^CiEiX&IJr                              <$,,*]      j .       (4.104)


The proof of the theorem can be found in standard textbooks. For prac­
tical purposes, and if one is not very interested in the detailed behavior
of the tails, n equal to 2 or 3 may already give a satisfactory approxima­
tion, especially if the Xi exhibits a Gaussian-like shape. See for example,
Fig. 4.5, where samples of 10 000 events have been simulated, 4 starting
from a uniform distribution and from a crazy square-wave distribution.
The latter, depicting a kind of "worst practical case", shows that, already
for n = 20 the distribution of the sum is practically normal. In the case
of the uniform distribution n = 3 already gives an acceptable approxima­
tion as far as probability intervals of one or two standard deviations from
the mean value are concerned. The figure also shows that, starting from a
triangular distribution (obtained in the example from the sum of two uni­
form distributed variables), n = 2 is already sufficient. (The sum of two
triangular distributed variables is equivalent to the sum of four uniform dis­
tributed variables.) For another example of central limit theorem at work
see Fig. 12.3.
  4
    Note that the Monte Carlo simulation does nothing but a numerical integration of
Eq. (4.95).
110             Bayesian   reasoning in data analysis: A critical       introduction




      200                                       200     HvJf,                      JpAJlnfl,
            Ui^liyVjW/li-Jl^jjOrVV^^

                                                   0
            0   0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8           1            0   0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8                 1
      400                                       400




            0    0.5       1      1.5     2            0     0.5          1      1.5       2
      400                                       400




            0   2    4     6    8        10            0    2       4     6    8          10

      500   -




            0    10 2 0 30 40 50                       0    10 20 30 40 50
Fig. 4.5 Central limit theorem at work: The sum of n iid variables, for two different
distributions, is shown. The values of n (top bottom) are 1, 2, 3, 5, 10, 20, 50.
                   Probability distributions       (a concise   reminder)                111


4.5.2   Distribution       of a sample                average
As first application of the theorem, let us remind ourselves that a sample
average Xn of n independent identical distributed ('Hid") variables,

                                    Xn = f]-Xi,                                     (4.105)
                                         *—' n
                                                i=l
is normally distributed, since it is a linear combination of n variables Xt,
with a = 1/n. Then,
                             Xn~Mfan,<rxJ,                                          (4.106)
                                       n       j
                            /^ = Z) - /* = ^                                         (4-107)
                                      »=i
                                                        2
                                       " / I N                  a2
                                            v       /
                                      »=i
                            aYn = -^=.                                              (4.109)

This result, we repeat, is independent of the distribution of X and is already
approximately valid for small values of n.


4.5.3   Normal       approximation                 of the binomial          and of the
        Poisson        distribution
Another important application of the theorem is that the binomial and
the Poisson distribution can be approximated, for "large numbers", by a
Gaussian distribution. This is a general result, valid for all distributions
which have the reproductive property under the sum. Distributions of this
kind are the binomial, the Poisson and the x 2 - Let us go into more detail:

 Bn,P -*N   (np,         y/np(l-p)j     The reproductive property of the binomial
    states that if Xi, X2, ■ ■., Xm are m independent variables, each
    following a binomial distribution of parameter n^ and p, then their
    sum Y = Y^i Xi also follows a binomial distribution with parameters
    n = Yi ni a n d P- It is easy to be convinced of this property without
    any mathematics. Just think of what happens if one tosses bunches of
    three, of five and often coins, and then one considers the global result:
    a binomial with a large n can then always be seen as a sum of many
    binomials with smaller m. The application of the central limit theorem
112            Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


      is straightforward, apart from deciding when the convergence is accept­
      able. The parameters on which one has to base a judgment are in this
      case p, = np and the complementary quantity /J,C = n (1 — p) = n — fi.
      If they are both > 10 then the approximation starts to be reasonable.
Vx^M(\,y/\)            The same argument holds for the Poisson distribution.
      In this case the approximation starts to be reasonable when /i = A > 10.


4.5.4     Normal     distribution    of measurement          errors
The central limit theorem is also important to justify why in many cases
the distribution followed by the measured values around their average is
approximately normal. Often, in fact, the random experimental error e,
which causes the fluctuations of the measured values around the unknown
true value of the physical quantity, can be seen as an incoherent sum of
smaller contributions e;

                                       = $ > ,                                  (4.110)


each contribution having a distribution which satisfies the conditions of the
central limit theorem.


4.5.5      Caution
Following this commercial in favor of the miraculous properties of the cen­
tral limit theorem, some words of caution are in order:

 • Although I have tried to convince the reader that the convergence is
   rather fast in the cases of practical interest, the theorem only states
   that the asymptotic Gaussian distribution is reached for n —> oo. As
   an example of very slow convergence, let us imagine 109 independent
   variables described by a Poisson distribution of Xi = 10~ 9 : their sum
   is still far from a Gaussian.
 • Sometimes the conditions of the theorem are not satisfied.
      — A single component dominates the fluctuation of the sum: a typical
        case is the well-known Landau ionization distribution; systematic
        errors may also have the same effect on the global error.
      - The condition of independence is lost if systematic errors affect a set
        of measurements, or if there is coherent noise.
                Probability distributions   (a concise   reminder)      113


  • The tails of the distributions do exist and they are not always Gaus­
    sian! Moreover, random variables might take values several standard
    deviations away from the mean. And fluctuations show up without
    notice!


4.6   Laws of large numbers

The convergence in probability of the relative frequency to the probability
("frequency tends to probability" is the often-heard, simplified statement)
is one of the best known laws of large numbers. However, it is a matter
of fact that these laws are often misunderstood and misused. We shall
not enter into technical details here, but we will discuss in Sec. 7.3 the
particular 'law' expressed by Bernoulli's theorem. My aim in Sec. 7.3 will
be to clarify two things which tend to be confused: "evaluating probability
from frequency" as against "predicting frequency from probability" (and,
hence, predicting future frequencies from past frequencies).
This page is intentionally left blank
                                       Chapter 5

                    Bayesian inference
                 of continuous quantities


                                          "... these problems are classified as probability
                                       of the causes, and are the most interesting of all
                                                       from their scientific applications".

                      "An effect may be produced by the cause a or by the cause b.
                     The effect has just been observed. We ask the probability that
                                      it is due to the cause a. This is an a posteriori
                                 probability of cause. But I could not calculate it, if
                      a convention more or less justified did not tell me in advance
                                      what is the a priori probability for the cause a
                          to come into play. I mean the probability of this event to
                                          some one who had not observed the effect."
                                                                     (Henri Poincare)


5.1    M e a s u r e m e n t error a n d m e a s u r e m e n t u n c e r t a i n t y

One might assume t h a t the concepts of error and uncertainty are well known
to be not worth discussing. Nevertheless afew comments are needed (al­
though for more details the DIN [3] and ISO [5,6] recommendations should
be consulted).

 • The first concerns the terminology. In fact the words error and uncer­
   tainty are currently used almost as synonyms:
      — "error" to mean both error and uncertainty (but nobody says
        "Heisenberg Error Principle");
      - "uncertainty" only for the uncertainty.
      "Usually" we understand what each is talking about, b u t a more precise
      use of these nouns would really help. This is strongly called for by t h e
      DIN [3] and ISO [5,6] recommendations. They state in fact t h a t

                                               115
116           Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


      — error is "the result of a measurement minus a true value of the mea-
       surand" - it follows that the error is usually unknown;
      — uncertainty is a "parameter, associated with the result of a mea­
       surement, that characterizes the dispersion of the values that could
       reasonably be attributed to the measurana™;
  • Within the physics community there is an established practice for
    reporting the final uncertainty of a measurement in the form of
    standard deviation. This is also recommended by the mentioned stan­
    dards. However, this should be done at each step of the analysis, instead
    of estimating "maximum error bounds" and using them as standard de­
    viation in the "error propagation".
  • The process of measurement is a complex one and it is difficult to dis­
    entangle the different contributions which cause the total error. In
    particular, the active role of the experimentalist is sometimes over­
    looked. For this reason it is often incorrect to quote the ("nominal")
    uncertainty due to the instrument as if it were the uncertainty of the
    measurement.


5.1.1    General form of Bayesian             inference
In the Bayesian framework the inference is performed by calculating the
final distribution of the random variable associated with the true values
of the physical quantities from all available information. Let us call x =
 {xi,a;2, ■ • ■ ,xn} the n-tuple ("vector") of observables, /i = {fii,(i2, ■ ■ ■ ,A*n}
the n-tuple of the true values of the physical quantities of interest, and
h = {hi, / i 2 , . . . , hn} the n-tuple of all the possible realizations of the in­
fluence quantity Hi (or variable); The term 'influence quantity' is used
here with an extended meaning, to indicate not only external factors which
could influence the result (temperature, atmospheric pressure, and so on)
but also any possible calibration constant and any source of systematic er­
rors. In fact the distinction between ^ and h is artificial, since they are
all conditional hypotheses. We separate them simply because at the end
we will "marginalize" the final joint distribution functions with respect to
H, integrating the joint distribution with respect to the other hypotheses
considered as influence variables.
    The likelihood of the sample x being produced from h and n and the
initial probability are

                                  f(x\n,h,HQ)
                   Bayesian      inference of continuous   quantities                117


and
                                f0(n,h)    = f(n,h\H0),                         (5.1)

respectively. H0 is intended to remind us, yet again, that likelihoods and
priors — and hence conclusions — depend on all explicit and implicit as­
sumptions within the problem, and in particular on the parametric func­
tions used to model priors and likelihoods. To simplify the formulae, H0
will no longer be written explicitly.
    Using the Bayes formula for multidimensional continuous distributions
[an extension of Eq. (4.70)] we obtain the most general formula of inference,

                  f(„ h\«.\-      /( g lM.fr)/o(M.ft)                            /,- 9N
                  mft|X;-                                                        [
                          //(a:|M,/0/o(M,fe)dMd/i'                                    '
yielding the joint distribution of all conditional variables fj, and h which
are responsible for the observed sample x. To obtain the final distribution
of [i one has to integrate Eq. (5.2) over all possible values of h, obtaining

                    f(        \ \=            If(x\^h)fo(^h)dh                   (5.3)
                    J[fl]X)
                                     //(x|Ai,/i)/o(M,/»)dMdh"

Apart from the technical problem of evaluating the integrals, if need be
numerically or using Monte Carlo methods 1 , Eq. (5.3) represents the most
general form of hypothetical inductive inference. The word "hypothetical"
reminds us of H0 ■
   When all the sources of influence are under control, i.e. they can be
assumed to take a precise value, the initial distribution can be factorized
by a fo(fi) and a Dirac S(h — h0), obtaining the much simpler formula
                                Jf(x I fi, h) f0(fi) S(h - h0) dh _
                / ( M I * ) = Jf(x \fj.,h) f (n)6(h -      h0)dndhi
                                               0
                                 f{x\n,h0)f0{n)
                                                                                 (5.4)
                              ff(x\n,h0)f0(fi)dfi       '
Even if formulae (5.3)-(5.4) look complicated because of the multidimen­
sional integration and of the continuous nature of \i, conceptually they are
identical to the example of the dE/dx measurement discussed in Sec. 3.5.3.
    The final probability density function provides the most complete and
detailed information about the unknown quantities, but sometimes (almost
    1
      This is conceptually what experimentalists do when they change all the parameters
of the Monte Carlo simulation in order to estimate the "systematic error".
118           Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical            introduction


always ...) one is not interested in full knowledge of /(/x), but just in a
few numbers which summarize at best the position and the width of the
distribution (for example when publishing the result in a journal in the
most compact way). The most natural quantities for this purpose are the
expectation value and the variance, or the standard deviation. Then the
Bayesian best estimate of a physical quantity is:

                             Jii = E[m] = I m f(n | x) d/x,                             (5.5)

                          c72i=Var(Mi)=E[^]-E2[/xi].                                    (5.6)

When many true values are inferred from the same data the numbers which
synthesize the result are not only the expected values and variances. Also
the covariances (or the correlation coefficients) should be reported.
    In the following sections we will deal in most cases with only one value
to infer:

                                     f(li\x) = ....                                     (5.7)


5.2   Bayesian inference a n d m a x i m u m likelihood

We have already said that the dependence of the final probabilities on
the initial ones gets weaker as the amount of experimental information
increases. Without going into mathematical complications (the proof of this
statement can be found for example in Ref. [49]) this simply means that,
asymptotically, whatever / O (A0 one puts in Eq. (5.4), f(/j, | a;) is unaffected.
This happens when the "width" of /o(/u) is much larger than that of the
likelihood, when the latter is considered as a mathematical function of /i.
Therefore f0 (fi) acts as a constant in the region of fi where the likelihood is
significantly different from 0. This is "equivalent" to dropping / O (A0 from
Eq. (5.4). This results in


                                           Jf(x\n,h0)dn
Since the denominator of the Bayes formula has the technical role of prop­
erly normalizing the probability density function, the result can be written
in the simple form

                   f(fi    | x) oc f(x   | fi, h0)   = "C((JL; x, h0)"    .              (5.9)
                  Bayesian inference of continuous   quantities              119


Asymptotically the final probability is just the (normalized) likelihood! The
notation £ is that used in the maximum likelihood literature (note that,
not only does / become £, but also " | " has been replaced by ";": C has no
probabilistic interpretation, when referring to /J,, in conventional statistics).
    If the mean value of f(/j, \ x) coincides with the value for which f(/j, | x)
has a maximum, we obtain the maximum likelihood method. This does not
mean that the Bayesian methods are "blessed" because of this achievement,
and hence they can be used only in those cases where they provide the same
results. It is the other way round: The maximum likelihood method gets
justified when all the limiting conditions of the approach (—> insensitivity
of the result from the initial probability —>• large number of events) are
satisfied.
    Even if in this asymptotic limit the two approaches yield the same nu­
merical results, there are differences in their interpretation:

  • The likelihood, after proper normalization, has a probabilistic meaning
    for Bayesians but not for frequentists; so Bayesians can say that the
    probability that fi is in a certain interval is, for example, 68%, while
    this statement is blasphemous for a frequentist ("the true value is a
    constant" from his point of view).
  • Frequentists prefer to choose /It, the value which maximizes the likeli­
    hood, as estimator. For Bayesians, on the other hand, the expectation
    value JIB = E[/x] (also called the prevision) is more appropriate. This
    is justified by the fact that the assumption of the E[/i] as best estimate
    of /i minimizes the risk of a bet (always keep the bet in mind!). For
    example, if the final distribution is exponential with parameter r (let us
    think for a moment of particle decays) the maximum likelihood method
    would recommend betting on the value t = 0, whereas the Bayesian ap­
    proach suggests the value t = r . If the terms of the bet are "whoever
    gets closest wins", what is the best strategy? And then, what is the
    best strategy if the terms are "whoever gets the exact value wins"?
    But now think of the probability of getting the exact value and of the
    probability of getting closest.


5.3   The dog, the hunter and the biased Bayesian estimators

One of the most important tests to judge the quality of an estimator, is
whether or not it is correct (not biased). Maximum likelihood estimators are
usually correct, while Bayesian estimators — analyzed within the maximum
120           Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical    introduction


likelihood framework — are often not. This could be considered a weak
point; however the Bayes estimators are simply naturally consistent with
the state of information before new data become available. In the maximum
likelihood method, on the other hand, it is not clear what the assumptions
are.
    Let us take an example which shows the logic of frequentistic inference
and why the use of reasonable prior distributions yields results which that
frame classifies as distorted. Imagine meeting a hunting dog in the country.
Let us assume we know that there is a 50 % probability of finding the dog
within a radius of 100 m centred on the position of the hunter (this is our
likelihood). Where is the hunter? He is with 50% probability within a
radius of 100 m around the position of the dog, with equal probability in
all directions. "Obvious". This is exactly the logic scheme used in the fre­
quentistic approach to build confidence regions from the estimator (the dog
in this example). This however assumes that the hunter can be anywhere
in the country. But now let us change the state of information: "the dog is
by a river"; "the dog has collected a duck and runs in a certain direction";
 "the dog is sleeping"; "the dog is in a field surrounded by a fence through
which he can pass without problems, but the hunter cannot". Given any
new condition the conclusion changes. Some of the new conditions change
our likelihood, but some others only influence the initial distribution. For
example, the case of the dog in an enclosure inaccessible to the hunter is
exactly the problem encountered when measuring a quantity close to the
edge of its physical region, which is quite common in frontier research.



5.4     Choice of the initial probability density function

The title of this section is similar to that of Sec. 3.11, but the problem and
the conclusions will be different.


5.4.1    Difference    with respect to the discrete             case
In Sec. 3.11 we said that the Indifference Principle (or, in its refined modern
version, the Maximum Entropy Principle) was a good choice. Here there
are problems with infinities and with the fact that it is possible to map an
infinite number of points contained in a finite region onto an infinite number
of points contained in a larger or smaller finite region. This changes the
probability density function. If, moreover, the transformation from one set
                   Bayesian inference of continuous     quantities        121


of variables to the other is not linear (see, e.g., Fig. 4.4), what is uniform
in one variable (X) is not uniform in another variable (e.g. Y = X2). This
problem does not exist in the case of discrete variables, since if X = Xi has
a probability f(x{) then Y = x\ has the same probability. A different way
of stating the problem is that the Jacobian of the transformation squeezes
or stretches the metrics, changing the probability density function.
    We will not enter into open discussion about the optimal choice of the
distribution. Essentially we shall use the uniform distribution, being careful
to employ the variable which "seems" most appropriate for the problem,
but You may disagree — surely with good reason — if You have a different
kind of experiment in mind.
    The same problem is also present, but well hidden, in the maximum
likelihood method. For example, it is possible to demonstrate that, in the
case of normally distributed likelihoods, a uniform distribution of the mean
H is implicitly assumed (see Sec. 6.2). There is nothing wrong with this,
but one should be aware of it.


5.4.2   Bertrand     paradox and angels'          sex
A good example to help understand the problems outlined in the previous
section is the so-called Bertrand paradox.

Problem: Given a circle of radius R and a chord drawn randomly on it,
   what is the probability that the length L of the chord is smaller than
   Rl
Solution 1: Choose "randomly" two points on the circumference and draw
   a chord between them: => P(L < R) = 1/3 = 0.33.
Solution 2: Choose a straight line passing through the centre of the circle;
   then draw a second line, orthogonal to the first, and which intersects
   it inside the circle at a "random" distance from the centre: =>■ P(L <
   R) = 1 - ^ / 3 / 2 = 0.13.
Solution 3: Choose "randomly" a point inside the circle and draw a
   straight line orthogonal to the radius that passes through the chosen
   point =>• P(L <R) = 1/4 = 0.25.
Your solution:               ?
Question: What is the origin of the paradox?
Answer: The problem does not specify how to "randomly" choose the
   chord. The three solutions take a uniform distribution: along the cir­
   cumference; along the radius; inside the circle. What is uniform in one
122          Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


   variable is not uniform in the others!
Question: Which is the right solution?
In principle you may imagine an infinite number of different solutions. From
a physicist's viewpoint any attempt to answer this question is a waste of
time. The reason why the paradox has been compared to the Byzantine
discussions about the sex of angels is that there are indeed people arguing
about it. For example, there is a school of thought which insists that
Solution 2 is the right one.
    In fact this kind of paradox, together with abuse of the Indifference
Principle for problems like "what is the probability that the sun will rise
tomorrow morning" threw a shadow over Bayesian methods at the end of
the last century. The Maximum Likelihood method, which does not make
explicit use of prior distributions, was then seen as a valid solution to the
problem. But in reality the ambiguity of the proper metrics on which the
initial distribution is uniform has an equivalent in the arbitrariness of the
variable used in the likelihood function (usually the 'best estimate' has
the nice property of being invariant, but the interpretation of the 'error
analysis' does not! — See Sec. 12.2). In the end, what was criticized when
it was stated explicitly in the Bayes formula is accepted passively when it
is hidden in the maximum likelihood method.
                               Chapter 6

                   Gaussian likelihood



                                         "Functio nostra Bet (p(z) = -£= e~h   z
                                                                                   "

                                                                (Carl F. Gauss)




6.1   Normally distributed observables

The first application of the Bayesian inference will be that of a normally
distributed quantity. Let us take a data sample q of n\ measurements,
of which we calculate the average qni. In our formalism qni is a value
that the random variable Qni can assume. Let us assume we know the
standard deviation a of the variable Q, either because n\ is very large and
can be estimated accurately from the sample or because it was known a
priori. (We are not going to discuss in this primer the case of small samples
and unknown variance — for criticisms about the standard treatment of
the small-sample problem see Ref. [33].) The property of the average (see
Sec. 4.5.2) tells us that the likelihood f(qn | n,a) is Gaussian:

                           Qni~M(p,a/^).                                (6.1)

To simplify the following notation, let us call x\ this average and a\ the
standard deviation of the average:

                               x\=qni,                                  (6.2)
                               ci = cr/Vni-                             (6.3)

                                     123
124            Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical                      introduction


6.2     Final distribution, prevision and credibility intervals of
        the true value

We then apply Eq. (5.4) and get
                                               1                      (xi-M) 2
                                          V 2 71" <7i           ^                       /o(/i)
           /0|ZI,./V(-,CTI)) =                                               2
                                                                                                   (6.4)
                                                                      (X,-M) 1
                                                        6XP                         fo(fj)dn
                                    /v^rx                       [         *°\ J
At this point we have to make a choice for / O (A0- A reasonable choice is to
take, as a first guess, a uniform distribution defined over a "large" interval
which includes x\. It is not really important how large the interval is, for
a few o\ away from x\ the integrand at the denominator tends to zero
because of the Gaussian function. What is important is that a constant
/o(/i) can be simplified in Eq. (6.4), obtaining

                                                   / 2 7T <J\   exp          2^r~
             /(^|xi,W(-,(Ti)) =                                                         2
                                                                                                   (6.5)
                                                                            (^I-/J)
                                         /-   OO V 2 7TO-1          exp          2<7?
                                                                                            d/x

The integral in the denominator is equal to unity, since integrating with
respect to fi is equivalent to integrating with respect to X\. The final result
is then
                                                                                            21
                                                   1
        f(li) =       f(li\x1,Af(;a1))                 exp                                         (6.6)
                                                rincri                           1o\
 •    the true value is normally distributed around X\\
 •    its best estimate (prevision) is E[/z] = x\\
 •    its variance isCTM= o"i;
 •    the "confidence intervals", or credibility intervals, in which there is a
      certain probability of finding the true value are easily calculable:


                       Probability level                 Credibility interval
                       (confidence level)               (confidence interval)
                              (%)
                              68.3                         X\         ±     d\
                              90.0                         x\         ±     1.65 <Ti
                              95.0                         x\         ±     1.96 c*\
                              99.0                         xi         ±     2.58cri
                             99.73                         X\         ±     3f7l
                                     Gaussian      likelihood                                     125


6.3     Combination of several measurements — Role of priors

Let us imagine making a second set of measurements of the physical quan­
tity, which we assume unchanged from the previous set of measurements.
How will our knowledge of /i change after this new information? Let us call
x2 = qn2 and 02 — a' /y/n~2 the new average and standard deviation of the
average (a' may be different from a of the sample of rii measurements),
respectively. Applying Bayes' theorem a second time we now have to use
as initial distribution the final probability of the previous inference:

                                          1                     (X2-M)2
                                       /2ir <T2   exp            2<ri
                                                                          f(fJ-\xi,Af(;Cri))
 f(fi\xi,ai,x2,o-2,Af)       =
                                 /;    2-K (72    expL-^^J/(Ha:i,JV(-,<7i))(i/i
                                                                         (6.7)
The integral is not as simple as the previous one, but still feasible analyti­
cally. The final result is
                                                                                   (21
                                                      1
            f(fJ,\x1,(Ti,X2,0-2,N)            =                 exp                             (6.8)
                                                   '2-K    aA               2a\

where
                                           x\ja\      -\-X2lcrl
                                 xA                                                             (6.9)
                                          ~JJoJTTJaY
                                                                                               (6.10)
                                           at         ai
One recognizes the famous formula of the weighted average with the inverse
of the variances, usually obtained from maximum likelihood. There are
some comments to be made.

 • Bayes' theorem updates the knowledge about fi in an automatic and
   natural way.
 • If a 1 2>CT2(and x\ is not "too far" from x2) the final result is only
   determined by the second sample of measurements. This suggests that
   an alternative vague a priori distribution can be, instead of uniform, a
   Gaussian with a large enough variance and a reasonable mean.
 • The combination of the samples requires a subjective judgment that
   the two samples are really coming from the same true value \x. We will
   not discuss here this point, but a hint on how to proceed is to: take the
   inference on the difference of two measurements, D, as explained at the
   end of Sec. 6.8 and judge yourself whether D = 0 is consistent with the
126            Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical              introduction


      probability density function of D. As is easy to imagine, the problem
      of the "outliers" should be treated with care, and surely avoiding auto­
      matic prescriptions. An example of solution will be discussed in detail
      in Chapter 11.


6.3.1     Update of estimates           in terms        of Kalman             filter
An interesting way of writing Eq. (6.9) is considering X\ and XA the esti­
mates of n at times ti and t2, respectively before and after the observa­
tion X2 happened at time £2- The uncertainties about /x at t\ and t2 are
C/i^i) = &1 a n d o-^(t2) = &A, respectively. Indicating the estimates at
different times by fi(t), we can rewrite Eq. (6.9) as

                              ih)
             A(*2) =    , „ <r              x(t22) ++
                                      o , ^ x{t                  °* ^ '>'        A(*i)

                   = A(*i) + 2/,?l* 1 L ^ bte) - A(*i)]                                     (6-11)
                                 CT
                                    x(i2)+^(£2)
                   = A(*i)+^(*2)[a:(t2)-A(*i)]                                             (6-12)

            ^(*2)=^(*l)--R:(*2)^(*l).                                                      (6J3)


where


                            *(*>) = 2Ua{+t(t\                    ■                         (6J4)
                                          <^(*2) + < ^ ( < i )
Indeed, we have given Eq. (6.9) the structure of a Kalman filter [65]. The
new observation 'corrects' the estimate by a quantity given by the innova­
tion (or residual) [x(t2) — £(*i)] times the blending factor (or gain) K(t2).
For an introduction about Kalman filter and its probabilistic origin, see
Refs. [66] and [67].


6.4     Conjugate priors

In Sec. 6.3 we introduced with a practical example the concept of conjugate
priors: a prior such that the product likelihood x prior, i.e. the posterior,
belongs to the same family as the prior. This is a well known technique to
simplify the calculations.
                             Gaussian   likelihood                         127


    The prior conjugate of a Gaussian likelihood is a Gaussian, due to the
well known property that products of Gaussians are still Gaussians. Less
trivial conjugate priors will be shown in the next chapter.


6.5   Improper priors — never take models literally!

There is another important concept we introduced in a practical way in
Sec. 6.2: a prior uniform from —oo to +oo. Obviously, this p.d.f. is not
normalizable, all moments of the distribution being infinite. Not normaliz-
able priors are called improper. They must be considered as mathematical
commodities to model our uncertainty over a wide range. For instance, if
we are interested in a length or a mass, 'infinite values' make no sense.
Similarly, the value of these quantities cannot be negative, and even less
they can be '—oo'. Nevertheless, if we make a measurement with a 'precise'
instrument having a Gaussian response, the product likelihood x prior is
immediately dumped by the Gaussian, when |/i — x\ is large enough. It
follows that the result does not change, if we extend the range of the vague
prior to infinity. This teaches us that we can make an easy use of improper
priors as long as the likelihood is Gaussian or, more in general, 'closed', in
the sense that will be discussed at length in Chapter 13. Otherwise, much
more care and deep thought is needed.
    I take the opportunity here to remark that we should be careful about
taking models too seriously. If we take once more the Gaussian case, a
Gaussian response of a detector should be considered as a practical model,
but should never be treated literally. Extreme values will never be observed,
not "because they are very improbable, as the Gaussian shows", but simply
because all instrument scales are by construction finite! There are several
problems in 'error propagation' (think for example of the p.d.f. Y = l/X,
starting from a Gaussian distributed X) in which presumed paradoxes van­
ish as soon as we try to model our knowledge in the most realistic way (an
effect similar to that discussed in Sec. 3.13).


6.6   Predictive distribution

We have seen the importance of f(x\ /x) for making inferences. It is im­
portant to stress that this p.d.f. does not describe 'probabilities of (future)
observations', but only 'probabilities of (future) observations under the hy­
pothesis that the true value is precisely /z'. However, we do not know the
128             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical           introduction


exact value of p, since our knowledges is described by f(fi \ I). Again, we
use the rules of probability, and weigh all infinite p.d.f.'s f(x | p,) with how
much we believe in each value of p:

                           f(x\I) =             Jf(x\p,I)f(»\I)dp.                       (6.15)

In the case where our knowledge about p comes from a measurement mod­
elled by a Gaussian likelihood with standard deviation ap (p stands for
'past'), and the response of the future experiment follows the same model,
but with aj, we have:

                                                               1               (p - xp)2
 f(xf   \xp)=    / - = — exp                                            exp              d/x
                J       y/2-Kaj                 2o)         / 2 7T<7T             2a%

                                                    (xf - xp)2
                    w                     exp                                            (6.16)
                                                    2(a2p + aj)
                     4°\     2
                                  4- n2

resulting in
                                     E[Xf] = xp                                          (6.17)
                                     a(Xf)      =     y/a*+<T}.                          (6.18)

Note that the predictive distribution (6.16) describes the uncertainty about
the not-yet-known value Xf, conditioned by the previous observation xp,
while the kind of 'metaphysical' object p, (i.e. about which we can have no
direct experience) disappears. Figure 6.1 shows the inferential scheme for
predicting the future observation Xf given the past observation xp.
    It is worth noting the particular case o-/ = ap = a0j^fn (i.e. the n
measurements can be considered as a single 'equivalent' measurement —
a schematization related to what statisticians call sufficiency): there is
a 52% probability that the new measurement will fall within ±a0/y/n of
the previous one. It is not uncommon to hear people saying that such a
probability is 68% and the kind of logical mistake they are making is clear.


6.7     Measurements close to the edge of the physical region

A case which has essentially no solution in the maximum likelihood ap­
proach is when a measurement is performed at the edge of the physical
region and the measured value comes out very close to it, or even on the
unphysical region. Let us take a numerical example.
                                     Gaussian    likelihood                                      129




                                      Prediction

                                           E(x f )



                                            E(AO
                         0.5                                     1.5




                                          4k
                                    Observation

Fig. 6.1 Scheme of predictive inference which skips t h e i n t e r m e d i a t e ' m e t a p h y s ­
ical' step fx.


Problem: An experiment is planned to measure a neutrino mass. The
   simulations show that the mass resolution is 3.3eV/c 2 , largely inde­
   pendent of the mass value, and that the measured mass is normally
   distributed around the true mass 1 . The mass value which results from
   the analysis procedure, 2 and corrected for all known systematic effects,
   is x = —5.41eV/c 2 . What have we learned about the neutrino mass?
Solution: Our a priori value of the mass is that it is positive and not
   too large (otherwise it would already have been measured in other
   experiments). One can take any vague distribution which assigns a
   probability density function between 0 and 20 or 30 eV/c 2 . In fact, if
   an experiment having a resolution of a = 3.3eV/c 2 has been planned
   and financed by rational people, with the hope of finding evidence of
   non-negligible mass, it means that the mass was thought to be in that
   range. If there is no reason to prefer one of the values in that interval
   a uniform distribution can be used, for example

                          /OKH       = k = 1/30               (0 < m < 30).                  (6.19)
   x
     In reality, often m2 rather than m is normally distributed. In this case the terms
of the problem change and a new solution should be worked out, following the trace
indicated in this example.
     We consider detector and analysis machinery as a black box, no matter how compli­
cated it is, and treat the numerical outcome as a result of a direct measurement [3].
130              Bayesian       reasoning in data analysis: A critical                  introduction


      Otherwise, if one thinks there is a greater chance of the mass having
      small rather than high values, a prior which reflects such an assumption
      could be chosen, for example a half normal with u0 — 10 eV

                                                              m
                /oiv(m) =                      exp                              (TO   > 0),            (6.20)
                                   ' 2 77 a0               ~2^
      or a triangular distribution

                         foT(m) = — (30 - x)                             (0 < m < 30).                 (6.21)

      Let us consider for simplicity the uniform distribution
                                               1         „™       {m — x)
                                                                    2<T2        k
             /(TO   I x, foK)     =          V^a          ^                                            (6.22)
                                                                            2
                                      r-30           ex           (m — x)
                                      Jo     /h„         P          2 a2        fcd/i
                                       19.8                   (TO - a;)2"1
                                                   exp                                (0 < TO < 30).
                                       27TCT                      2a 2
                                                                                                       (6.23)

      The value which has the highest degree of belief is TO = 0, but /(TO)
      is nonvanishing up to 30 eV/c 2 (even if very small). We can define an
      interval, starting from TO = 0, in which we believe that TO should have
      a certain probability. For example this level of probability can be 95 %.
      One has to find the value m0 for which the cumulative function F(m0)
      equals 0.95. This value of m is called the upper limit (or upper bound).
      The result is

                          m < 3.9 eV/c 2                 at 0.95 % probability.                        (6.24)

      If we had assumed the other initial distributions the limit would have
      been in both cases

                          m < 3.7 eV/c 2                  at 0.95 % probability,                       (6.25)

    practically the same (especially if compared with the experimental res­
    olution of 3.3 eV/c 2 ).
C o m m e n t : Let us assume an o priori function sharply peaked at zero and
    see what happens. For example it could be of the kind 3
                                                                   1
                                                   fos(m) oc                                           (6.26)
  3
      For a deeper discussion about meaning and use of this prior, see Chapter 13.
                              Gaussian   likelihood                          131


      To avoid singularities in the integral, let us take a power of m slightly
      greater than — 1, for example —0.99, and let us limit its domain to 30,
      getting
                              , , ,  0.01 -30 0 0 1                      ,„„,
                              f°sM =    m0.99       •                   ( 6 - 27 )
      The upper limit becomes

                    m < 0.006 eV/c 2      at 0.95 % probability.         (6.28)

      Any experienced physicist would find this result ridiculous. The upper
      limit is about 0.2 % of the experimental resolution; rather like expect­
      ing to resolve objects having dimensions smaller than a micron with a
      design ruler! Note instead that in the previous examples the limit was
      always of the order of magnitude of the experimental resolution a. As
      fos(m) becomes more and more peaked at zero (power of x -> 1) the
      limit gets smaller and smaller. This means that, asymptotically, the
      degree of belief that m = 0 is so high that whatever you measure you
      will conclude that m = 0: you could use the measurement to calibrate
      the apparatus! This means that this choice of initial distribution was
      unreasonable.
      Instead, priors motivated by the positive attitude of the researchers are
      much more stable, and even when the observation is "very negative"
      the result is stable, and one always gets a limit of the order of the
      experimental resolution. Anyhow, it is also clear that when x is several
      a below zero one starts to suspect that "something is wrong with the
      experiment", which formally corresponds to doubts about the likelihood
      itself. In this case one needs to change analysis model. An example of
      remodelling the likelihood is shown in Chapter 11.

We shall come back to this delicate issue in Chapter 13.


6.8     Uncertainty of the instrument scale offset

In our scheme any quantity of influence of which we do not know the exact
value is a source of systematic error. It will change the final distribution
of fi and hence its uncertainty. We have already discussed the most gen­
eral case in Sec. 5.1.1. Let us make a simple application making a small
variation to the example in Sec. 6.2: the "zero" of the instrument is not
known exactly, owing to calibration uncertainty. This can be parametrized
132                 Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical                       introduction


assuming that its true value Z is normally distributed around 0 (i.e. the
calibration was properly done!) with a standard deviation az- Since, most
probably, the true value of /i is independent of the true value of Z, the
initial joint probability density function can be written as the product of
the marginal ones:
                                                                     1
                    f°{V,z)      = / o W / o ( z )       =   k-                exp                           (6.29)
                                                                  12-KOZ                  24
Also the likelihood changes with respect to Eq. (6.1):


                                                     1                    (tti - jLt -    z)2
                         f(xi \n,z) =                        exp                                             (6.30)
                                              ' 2 7T(Ti                         2o\
Putting all the pieces together and making use of Eq. (5.3) we finally get


f(v\xi,...,fo(z))
                                    I:   '2 7T <T\   exp
                                                                  (xx-n-zf
                                                                                     /2n az exp
                                                                                                       \-A      dz

                                  //;    2 7T G\   exp              2a?
                                                                                      1
                                                                                 / 2 7TCTZ
                                                                                             exp    [-^k Az
Integrating we get
                                                                                                (fi-xt)   2 1
      /(AO =              f(f*\xi,...,fo(z))                                     exp
                                                         /2TT ^JG\       +a                  2(<rf + 4)J
                                                                                                             (6.31)
(It may help to know that
                         r+oo
                                                                                   ra2fo2">
                                exp 6a;                  da; = v a 2 7r exp                       •)
                     /
For an introduction to Bayesian methods, where Gaussian integrals are also
discussed, see e.g. Ref. [46]. The result is that /(/i) is still a Gaussian, but
with a larger variance. The global standard uncertainty is the quadratic
combination of that due to the statistical fluctuation of the data sample and
the uncertainty due to the imperfect knowledge of the systematic effect:
                                                2            2 ,     2
                                              °tot                                                           (6.32)

This result (a theorem under well stated conditions!) is often used as a
'prescription', although there are still some "old-fashioned" recipes which
require different combinations of the contributions to be performed.
    It must be noted that in this framework it makes no sense to speak of
"statistical" and "systematical" uncertainties, as if they were of a different
nature. They have the same probabilistic nature: Q is around /J, with a
                             Gaussian   likelihood                        133


standard deviation a±, and Z is around 0 with standard deviation az- What
distinguishes the two components is how the knowledge of the uncertainty
is gained: in one case (<TI) from repeated measurements; in the second
case (az) the evaluation was done by someone else (the constructor of the
instrument), or in a previous experiment, or guessed from the knowledge
of the detector, or by simulation, etc. This is the reason why the ISO
Guide [5] prefers the generic names Type A and Type B for the two kinds of
contribution to global uncertainty (see Sec. 8.7). In particular, the name
"systematic uncertainty" should be avoided, while it is correct to speak
about "uncertainty due to a systematic effect".


6.9    Correction for known systematic errors

It is easy to be convinced that if our prior knowledge about Z was of the
kind

                               Z~Af(z0,az)                             (6.33)

the result would have been

                      H~N{xi       -Z0, \jo\-\-o\ J ,                  (6.34)

i.e. one has first to correct the result for the best value of the systematic
error and then include in the global uncertainty a term due to imperfect
knowledge about it. This is a well-known and practised procedure, although
there are still people who confuse z0 with its uncertainty.


6.10    Measuring two quantities with the same instrument
        having an uncertainty of the scale offset

Let us take an example which is a little more complicated (at least from
the mathematical point of view) but conceptually very simple and also
very common in laboratory practice. We measure two physical quantities
with the same instrument, assumed to have an uncertainty on the "zero",
modelled with a normal distribution as in the previous sections. For each
of the quantities we collect a sample of data under the same conditions,
which means that the unknown offset error does not change from one set of
measurements to the other. Calling fix and /X2 the true values, X\ and x^
the sample averages, a\ and a-i the average's standard deviations, and Z the
134                  Bayesian reasoning in data analysis:                   A critical             introduction


t r u e value of t h e "zero", the initial probability density and the likelihood
are
                                                                                           1
                fo(Hl,[l2,z)       = /o(Ml)/o(/J2)/o(z)                      =k                       exp
                                                                                        2-KOZ                     24
                                                                                               2
                                              1                       {xi -Hi-             z)
      f(Xi,X2\ni,H2,z)              =                     exp
                                          ' 2 7T<7i                        2a\
                                                  1                       (X2         -\12~Z)
                                                            exp
                                             J2-KU2                                 2 a2
                                              1                       1 ({xi         -Hi       -     z)2
                                                          exp
                                         2 7T (J\ <J2                 2
                                             (x2 - A*2 - zf
                                                                                                                         (6.35)
                                         +
T h e result of the inference is now t h e joint probability density function of
Hi and /x 2 :

                                                          ff(xi,x2         \HI,H2,Z)                   fo((J.i,H2,z)dz
  f(Hl,H2\xi,X2,<Tl,(T2,fo(z))                        =
                                                                           J...      d/ii d/u2 d^
                                                                                                                         (6.36)
where expansion of the functions has been omitted for the sake of clarity.
Integrating we get
                                                             1
             /(Ml,A*2)
                               2TT   y/af + a\ yja\                  + a\ y/l - p2

                               x exp l            2 ( l - p 22)           CT?     + al
                                            (/xi - x i ) ( / u 2 - a ; 2 )              ,(/i2-a;2)
                                   -2p                                                                            ,      (6.37)
                                          ^fT^|y^+4 + -oi+o'z J
where

                                     P =                                                                                 (6.38)
                                             V^i 2 + a\ yja22 + a\

If (T^ vanishes then Eq. (6.37) has the simpler expression

                               1                        (/Xl - X l ) 2              1                       (M2 - Z2) 2
/(M1.M2)                                 exp                                                   exp
                 <TZ-*0    \/2l{<Jl                         2a\                   '2ira2                          2 a2
                                                                                                                         (6.39)
i.e. if there is no uncertainty on the offset calibration then the joint den­
sity function f{H\,Hv) is equal t o t h e product of two independent normal
                             Gaussian likelihood                         135


functions, i.e. pi and p2 are independent. In the general case we have to
conclude the following.

 • The effect of the common uncertainty oz makes the two values corre­
   lated, since they are affected by a common unknown systematic error.
 • The joint density function is a bivariate Gaussian distribution of param­
   eters x\, a^ = yja\ + cr|, x2, <TM2 = \Jo\ + oz, and p (see example
   of Fig. 4.2).
 • The marginal distributions are still normal:

                          ^~N(xu^j            al+o-l},                (6.40)

                          to~M(x2,J°l+^)-                             (6.41)

 • The covariance between pi and p2 is

                 Cov(m,n2)     = po-^o-^
                               = Py/o31+T2zy/al+a%=asz.               (6.42)

 • The correlation coefficient is always non-negative (p > 0), as intuitively
   expected from the definition of this kind of systematic error. The cor­
   relation coefficient vanishes when oz is much smaller than o\ and a2,
   tends to 1 if az dominates (the uncertainties become 100% correlated).
 • The distribution of any function g{pi,p2) can be calculated using the
   standard methods of probability theory. For example, one can demon­
   strate that the sum S = pi + p2 and the difference D = p\ — p2 a r e
   also normally distributed (see also the introductory discussion to the
   central limit theorem and Sec. 8.13 for the calculation of averages and
   standard deviations):

                   S~N(XI+X2,          ]/af   + al + (2az)A ,         (6.43)

                  D ~ M [xx - x2, y/af + a^\ .                        (6.44)

    The result can be interpreted in the following way.
    — The uncertainty on the difference does not depend on the common
     offset uncertainty: whatever the value of the true "zero" is, it cancels
     in differences.
136            Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical        introduction


       — In the sum, instead, the effect of the common uncertainty is some­
        what amplified since it enters "in phase" in the global uncertainty
        of each of the quantities.


6.11     Indirect calibration

Let us use the result of the previous section to solve another typical prob­
lem of measurements. Suppose that after (or before, it doesn't matter)
we have done the measurements of x\ and X2 and we have the final result,
summarized in Eq. (6.37), we know the "exact" value of /ii (for example we
perform the measurement on a reference). Let us call it /x°. Will this infor­
mation provide a better knowledge of ^        In principle yes: the difference
between x\ and /ij defines the systematic error (the true value of the "zero"
Z). This error can then be subtracted from x-i to get a corrected value.
Also the overall uncertainty of /x2 should change, intuitively it "should"
decrease, since we are adding new information. But its value doesn't seem
to be obvious, since the logical link between \i\ and /Z2 is n\ —> Z —> Hi-
    The problem can be solved exactly using the concept of conditional
probability density function /Qu2 | Mi) [ see Eqs. (4.83)-(4.84)]. We get


  V2\»l~M\x2         + ^rf^{ti-x1),              \jol+[-^           + -^)        |.   (6.45)


The best value of M2 is shifted by an amount A, with respect to the mea­
sured value X2, which is not exactly xi — Mi> as was naively guessed, and
the uncertainty depends on <72, c z and o\. It is easy to be convinced that
the exact result is more reasonable than the (suggested) first guess. Let us
rewrite A in two different ways:
                              2
                   A = -^f-5-(/*;-*!)                                                 (6.46)
                       °i ' az
                          1     I ,                  „, . 1
                                       2    • (X! ~ H°l) + ~2       ■0                (6.47)
                         ^+           ) A                   V   7




  • Equation (6.46) shows that one has to apply the correction x\ — ii\ only
    if ci = 0. If instead az = 0 there is no correction to be applied, since
    the instrument is perfectly calibrated. If o\ « az the correction is half
    of the measured difference between x\ and n\.
                                Gaussian     likelihood                  137


 • Equation (6.47) shows explicitly what is going on and why the result
   is consistent with the way we have modelled the uncertainties. In fact
   we have performed two independent calibrations: one of the offset and
   one of ii\. The best estimate of the true value of the "zero" Z is the
   weighted average of the two measured offsets.
 • The new uncertainty of p,2 [see Eq. (6.45)] is a combination of 02 and
   the uncertainty of the weighted average of the two offsets. Its value
   is smaller than it would be with only one calibration and, obviously,
   larger than that due to the sampling fluctuations alone:


                        °* < \U + 4t^                     < \Af+4 •            (6-48)

6.12   The Gauss derivation of the Gaussian

It might be interesting to end this chapter in a historical vein, look­
ing at how Gauss arrived at the distribution function which now carries
his name. [68] Note that the Gaussian function was already known before
Gauss, describing the asymptotical behavior of the binomial distribution,
in a purely probabilistic context. The Gauss derivation arose in a more
inferential framework and, indeed, Gauss used what we would nowadays
call Bayesian reasoning.
    Gauss's problem, expressed in modern terms, was: what is the more
general form of the likelihood such that the maximum of the posterior of /i
is equal to the arithmetic average of the observed values (and the function
has some 'good' mathematical properties)?
    In solving his problem, Gauss first derived a formula for calculating the
probability of hypotheses given some observations had been made, under
the assumption of equal prior probability of the hypotheses. In practice,
he reobtained Bayes theorem (without citing Bayes) in the case of uniform
prior. Note that the concept of prior ("ante eventum cognitutn") 4 was
very clear and natural to him, opposed to the concept of posterior ( "post
eventum cognitum"). Then moving from discrete hypotheses to continuous
observations Xi and true value \± (using our terminology), he looked for
the functional form of ip, which describes the probability of obtaining xi
from /x (the likelihood, in our terms). Considering the observations to be
  4
   A11 quotes in Latin are from Ref. [68].
138              Bayesian   reasoning in data analysis: A critical      introduction


independent, the joint distribution of the sample x is then given by

               f(x | n) = <p(xi - n) ■ (p(x2 - /i)                   f{xn   - fi).        (6.49)

At this point, two hypotheses enter.
(1) All values of A* are considered a priori ("ante ilia observationes")
    equally likely ( "... aeque probabilia fuisse").
(2) The maximum a posteriori ( "post Mas observationes") is given by /i =
    x, arithmetic average of the n observed values.

The first hypothesis gives

       /(At | x) oc f(x | At) = <p(xi - At) • <p(x2 - M)                <p(xn - A4) •      (6-50)
To use the second condition, he imposed that the first derivative of the
posterior is null for /j, = x:

           d/(M|x)                                                       =o             (6 5i)
              dAt     M=x
                            =° ^ i TV-^n ^ t e - ^ )             \l—X
                                                                              >          -
i.e.

                                       *)    .   _/ = 0 ,                                6.52
                                        <p(xi — x)
where ip' stands for the derivative of <f> with respect to fi.                    Calling ip the
function (p'/tp and indicating with zi = Xi — x the differences from the
average, which have to follow the constraint ^2i Z{ = 0, we have



Since this relation must hold independently of n and the values of Zi, the
functional form of ip(z) has to satisfy the following constraint:

                                -ip(z) = k,                           (6.54)
                                z
where A; is a constant (note that the limit z -» 0 is not a problem, for the
derivative of <p at z = 0 vanishes and the condition tp(z)/z = k implies that
numerator and denominator have to tend to zero with the same speed).
It follows that

                                       — =       kzdz,
                            Gaussian    likelihood                       139


i.e.
                         ip{z) oce£ z 2 =e-h2z\                      (6.55)
where Gauss replaced fc/2 by — h2 to make its negative sign evident, because
<p is required to have a maximum in z = 0. Normalizing the function
dividing by its integral from — oo to oo, an integral acknowledged to be due
to Laplace ("ab ill. Laplace inventum"), he finally gets the 'Gauss' error
function ( "functio nostra fiet"):

                           ip{z) =     A=e-»2*\                     (6 .5 6 )
This page is intentionally left blank
                                Chapter 7

                Counting experiments



                                     "... have observed that, out of p + q infants,
                                                there is born p boys and q girls, and
                        ... we seek the probability P that, out ofm + n infants
                             who must be born, there will be m boys and n girls.
                         ... The probability that, in one year, the births of boys
                                   will not be by a greater number in Paris than
                                            those of girls, is therefore less than jgg;
                                       . . . we can therefore wager with advantage
                                     one against one that this will not happen in
                                  the interval of one hundred seventy-five years"
                                                              (Pierre-Simone Laplace)




Measurement is not only reading a value on a scale, b u t also counting the
occurrence of some events, for example when we are interested in measuring
a cross section, an efficiency or a branching ratio in particle decay. T h e
most important models for physics applications are the cases in which the
number of counts are thought t o be described by a binomial or a Poisson
distribution. T h e purpose of the measurement consists of inferring the value
of the parameter of these distributions.




7.1   Binomially distributed observables

Let us assume we have performed n trials and obtained x favorable events.
W h a t is the probability of the next event? This situation happens fre­
quently when measuring efficiencies, branching ratios, etc. Stated more

                                       141
142             Bayesian   reasoning in data analysis: A critical           introduction


generally, one tries to infer the "constant and unknown probability" 1 of an
event occurring.
    Where we can assume that the probability is constant and the observed
number of favorable events are binomially distributed, the unknown quan­
tity to be measured is the parameter p of the binomial [see Eq. (4.18)].
Using Bayes' theorem we get

                                      f(x\Bn,P)fo(p)
                f(p\x,n,B)
                                   fof(x\Bn,p)fo(j>)dp
                                         _^_p*{l_p)n-x}o{p)

                                   fl     n—x)\ x\
                                         (n—x)
                                                     px (1 -p)n      x
                                                                          fo(p)dp
                                         P*(I-P)"-*
                                   Jo Px (1 - P)n        x
                                                              dp
where an initial uniform distribution has been assumed. The final distri­
bution is known to statisticians as beta distribution (see Sec. 4.2) since the
integral at the denominator is the special function called j3, defined also for
real values of x and n (technically this is a beta with parameters r = x + 1
    x
      This concept, which is very close to the physicist's mentality, is not correct from the
probabilistic — cognitive — point of view. According to the Bayesian scheme, in fact,
the probability changes with the new observations. The final inference of p, however,
does not depend on the particular sequence yielding x successes over n trials. This can
be seen in the next table where fn(p) is given as a function of the number of trials n,
for the three sequences which give two successes (indicated by "1") in three trials [the
use of Eq. (7.2) is anticipated]:

                                             Sequence
                     n         Oil              101                 110
                     0          1                1                    1
                     1       2(l-p)             2p                   2p
                     2      6p(l - p )       6p(l - p )             3p2
                     3     12p2(l-p)        12p2(l-p)          12 p 2 ( l - p )

This important result, related to the concept of exchangeability and to de Finetti's rep­
resentation theorem, [16,27, 69, 70] "allows" a physicist who is reluctant to give up the
concept "unknown constant probability" to see the problem from his point of view,
ensuring that the same numerical result is obtained. Note that an approach which prac­
tically coincides with that based on exchangeability is used by Schrodinger in Ref. [41]
in order to evaluate the probability of the (n + l)-th event, without having to speak of
/ ( p ) . Indeed, he obtains the Laplace's rule of succession (7.9), but, finally, he seems
'afraid' of the result, which "can only be taken seriously for at least fairly large N, m
and N — m" [41] (these quantities correspond to our n + 1, x + 1 and n — x). The
parametric-inferencial approach that we use solves easily this difficulty, by stating also
how much we believe on the parameter p.
                                 Counting     experiments                         143




          10
                •                    A   n = 90
      f(p)      ■                                             x/n =       1/3
            5
                -                  /"" "'An = 30
                           ,jj                              __n = 3

                          0.2               0.4         0.6
                                                               P




Fig. 7.1 Probability density function of the binomial parameter p, having observed x
successes in n trials.

and s — n — x + 1). In our case these two numbers are integer and the
integral becomes equal to a;! (n — x)\/(n + 1)!. We then get

                                                j
                    f(p | x, n, B) =        ,     ; , px (1 - p)n-x   ,         (7.2)
                                         x\ (n — x)\
some examples of which are shown in Fig. 7.1. Expected value and variance
of this distribution are:
                             x +1
                      E(p) =                                                    (7.3)
                             n +2
                             (a; + l ) ( n - a ; + l)
                    Var(p) =                                                    (7.4)
                               (n + 3)(n + 2) 2
                             a; + l / n + 2 x + 1            1
                             n+2\n+2                    n+2)n+Z
                                                      1
                           = E(p) (1 - E(p))                                    (7.5)
                                                   n+3
144          Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical        introduction


The value of p for which f(p) has the maximum is instead pm = x/n.
The expected value E(p) has the meaning of probability of any of the next
i-th events Ej (i > n), given the present status of information. In fact,
by definition, P(Ei \p) = p. But we are not sure about p. Hence, using
probability rules we have:

             P(Ei>n      \x,n,B)=            f P(Ei |p) f(p| x,n,B) dp              (7.6)
                                            Jo
                                        = I pf(p\x,n,B)dp                          (7.7)
                                        = E(p)                                      (7.8)
                                          x+ 1
                                            n+2        (for uniform prior).         (7.9)

Equation (7.9) is known as "recursive Laplace formula", or "Laplace's rule
of succession". Not that there is no magic if the formula gives a sensible
result even for the extreme cases x = 0 and x = n Vn (even if n = 0!): it
is just a consequence of the prior.
    When n, x and n — x become "large" (in practice > O(10) is enough
for many practical purposes) /(p) has the following asymptotic properties:
                                            X
                      E ( p ) *a   Pm   =
                                            ~~ j                                   (7.10)
                                            n
                 Var(p) ?                                 "(1~Pm),                 (7.11)
                                    n \         nJ n
                                     /pm(l-Pm)
                         Up   f                                                    (7.12)
                              ~V
                           Pr     - Af(p m ,c p ).                                 (7.13)

Under these conditions the frequentistic "definition" (evaluation rule!) of
probability (x/n) is recovered, but with several advantages: the concept of
probability is kept well separated from the evaluation rule; the underlying
hypotheses are well stated; we have a precise measure of how uncertain our
evaluation is. We shall come back to this point in Sec. 7.3.
   Note, finally, that Eq. (7.11) can also be obtained assuming an approx­
imated normal distribution for f(p) and using the general property (4.36),
as

                 V.r-Hp)*-d-lUfiplX>ndp>2B)                                        (7.14)
                              Counting     experiments                               145


7.1.1   Observing     0% or 100%
Going back to practical applications, let us see two particular situations:
when x = 0 and x = n. In these cases one usually gives the result as upper
or lower limits, respectively. Let us sketch the solutions:




                          f(n\Bn,p)=pn,                                           (7.15)
                                               pU                   n
                     f(p\x    = n,B)=                    =(n + l)p ,              (7.16)
                                                    d
                                     Jo P" P
                     F(p\x = n,B)=pn+1.                                           (7.17)

    To get the 95 % lower bound (limit):

                             F{Po\x      = n,B) = 0.05,


                                             Po = " W 0 5 .                       (7.18)

    An increasing number of trials n constrain more and more p around
    the upper edge 1.
    x = 0:

                     /(0|B„, p ) = ( l - p ) n ,                                  (7.19)
                                          (1 P)
             f(p\x   = 0,n,B) =       fl/   ~ "          = (n + 1) (1 - p ) n ,   (7.20)
                                      J0(l-p)ndp

            F(p\x    = 0,n,B) = l-(l-p)n+1.                                       (7.21)

    To get the 95 % upper bound (limit):

                        F(po\x     = 0,n,B) = 0.95,

                                            p 0 = 1 - " + vU05.                   (7.22)

The following table shows the 95 % probability limits as a function of n.
The Poisson approximation, to be discussed in the next section, is also
shown.
146              Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical     introduction


                                   Probability level = 95 %
                    n       x= n                   a: = 0
                          binomial     binomial     Poisson approx.
                                                       {p0 = 3/n)
                    3      p > 0.47    p < 0.53           P< 1
                    5      p > 0.61    p < 0.39          p<0.6
                   10      p > 0.76    p < 0.24          p<0.3
                   50      p > 0.94    p < 0.057        p < 0.06
                  100      p > 0.97    p < 0.029        p < 0.03
                 1000     p > 0.997 p < 0.003           p < 0.003



7.1.2   Combination              of independent        measurements
To show in this simple case how f(p) is updated by the new information,
let us imagine we have performed two experiments. The results are xi = ni
and X2 = ri2, respectively. Obviously the global information is equivalent
to x = x\ + X2 and n = n\ + n^, with x = n. We then get

         f(p\x      = n,B) = (n + l)pn = (ni + n 2 + l)p', m + n 2                  (7.23)

A different way of proceeding would have been to calculate the final distri­
bution from the information X\ = n\,

                           f{p\xl=nuB)^{nl             +     l)pn\                  (7.24)

and feed it as initial distribution to the next inference:
                                                   Pn2/(p|*i=ni,B)
           f{p\xi       =ni,x2     =n2,B)    =                                      (7.25)
                                                 JoPn2f(p\xi =ni,jB)dp
                                                   p (ni + l)pni
                                                     n2
                                                                                    (7.26)
                                                 Jo P712 ("l + 1) Pni dp
                                                 (n1+n2 + l)pni+n2,                 (7.27)

getting the same result.


7.1.3    Conjugate        prior and many data              limit
So far, we have used, for simplicity's sake, a uniform prior. If our beliefs
differ substantially from those described by a uniform distribution (and we
do not have many data, as will be clear in a while), we need to model our
                             Counting    experiments                                   147


beliefs, insert then in the Bayes formula and do the calculations. As we
have seen for the Gaussian case (Sees. 6.3 and 6.4) life gets easier if we
choose a convenient mathematical form for the prior. The binomial case
is particularly fortunate, in the sense that its conjugate prior is easy and
flexible.
    Apart from the binomial coefficient, f(x \p) has the shape px(l   —p)n~x,
having the same structure as the beta distribution (see Sec. 4.2) with pa­
rameters r = x + 1 and s = n — x + 1. Also the uniform prior is nothing
but a beta function with parameters r = s = 1 (see Fig. 4.1). In general, if
we choose an initial beta function with parameters r* and Sj the inference
will be


        f(p\n,x,Beta(r,s))     ex [ p * ( l - p ) n - * ] x [ ^ ( l - p ) * " 1 ]   (7.28)
                                     B+r|    1         n   a!+     1
                               <xp          - (l-p) -            "- .               (7.29)


The final distribution is still a beta with rf = J-J + x and Sf = Si + (n — x),
and expected value and standard deviation can be calculated easily from
Eqs. (4.55) and (4.56).
    Note that, contrary to the Gaussian case, the flexibility of the beta
function (Fig. 4.1) allows several models of prior beliefs to be described,
without the risk that mathematical convenience forces the solution (like
the famous joke of the drunk man under a lamp, looking for his key lost
in the darkness...). For example, a prior belief that p must be around
0.5, with 0.05 standard uncertainty corresponds to a beta function with
Ti — 49.5 and Si =49.5. In other terms, our initial knowledge is equivalent
to that which we would have reached starting from absolute indifference
about p (uniform distribution) and having performed 97 trials, about 48-49
of which gave a success. If, given this condition, we perform n = 10 trials
and register x = 2 successes, our knowledge will be updated into a beta
of rf = 51.5 and Sf = 58.5. The new expected value and uncertainty of p
will be 0.472 and 0.048: we do not change our opinion much, although a
relative frequency of 20% was observed.
    The use of the conjugate prior in this problem demonstrates in a clear
way how the inference becomes progressively independent of the prior in­
formation in the limit of a large amount of data: this happens when both
x 3> ti and n — x ^> Si. In this limit we get the same result we would get
from a flat prior (r» = s« = 1).
148          Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


7.2   The Bayes problem

The original "problem in the doctrine of chances", solved by Thomas
Bayes [71] using for the first time the reasoning that presently carries his
name, belongs to the kind of inferential problems with binomial likelihood.
A billiard ball is rolled on a segment of unity length. The mechanism of
the game is such that we consider all points p, where the ball might stop,
equally likely (it would be more realistic to think of a pointer on a wheel).
A second ball is then rolled n times under the same assumptions and some­
body tells us the number of times x it stops in a position pi < p. The
problem is to infer position p given n and x, for example to say what is the
probability that p is between a and b, with 0 < a < b < 1. Note that in this
problem the uniform prior is specified in the assumptions of the problem.


7.3   Predicting relative frequencies — Terms and interpreta­
      tion of Bernoulli's theorem

We have seen when and how it is possible to assess a probability using
observed relative frequencies. A complementary problem is that of predict­
ing relative frequency / „ in n "future" trials, under the hypothesis that
P{Ei) = po Vi. The uncertain number X of successes is described by the
binomial distribution. The relative frequency of successes / „ = X/n is an
uncertain number too, with a probability function easily obtainable from
the binomial one. Expected value and the standard deviation are

                 E(/„) = - E(X | Bn,P0 ) = T^=Po                              (7.30)
                         n                  n
                 a(fn)^1-a((X\Bn,Po)=^Po^Po).                                 (7.31)

This result is at the basis of the well-known and often misunderstood
Bernoulli's theorem (one of the "large number laws"): "as the number
of trials is very large, we consider it highly improbable to observe values of
/ „ which differ much from po," or, if you like, "it is practically certain that
the frequency becomes practically equal to the probability" [16]. The sim­
plified expression "the relative frequency tends to the probability" might
give the (wrong) idea that fn tends to po in a mathematical sense, like in
the definition of a limit. Instead, for any n the range of / „ is always [0,1],
though for large n we are practically sure that the extreme values will not
                                Counting       experiments                            149


be observed. Some comments are in order:

  • The theorem does not imply any kind of "memory" of the trial mecha­
    nism that would influence future events to make the long term results
    "obey the large number law". 2 Let us take as an example an urn con­
    taining 70% white balls. We plan to make n extractions and have al­
    ready made no extractions, observing a relative frequency of white balls
    fw0- We are interested in the relative frequency we expect to observe
    when we reach n extractions. The crucial observation is that we can
    make probabilistic considerations only about the remaining n — no ex­
    tractions, the previous n belonging to the realm of certainty to which
    probability theory does not apply. Indicating by the subscript 1 the
    quantities referring to the remaining extractions, we have 3

                                E[fWl]=p0                                          (7.32)

                                a{fWl)     =           f=      •                   (7.33)

    Note, however, that the prevision of the relative frequency of the entire
    ensemble is in general different from that calculated a priori. Calling
    x\ the uncertain number of favorable results in the next n\ trials, we
    have the uncertain frequency fw = {fw0 no + X\)/N, and hence

            jp,t i i     fw0no+Poni                   fw0 n0 + po {n - n0)
            &[jw | no\ =                          =                                ('-o4)

            <?{fw | «o) = \ / p o ( l - P o ) A / — = \/po (1 - Po) J            -.(7.35)

    As no approaches n, we are practically sure about the overall relative
    frequency, because it now belongs to the past.
    2
      I think that the name 'law' itself should be avoided, because it gives the strong
feeling of something to which nature has to obey, like in the case of Newton laws. Once
I met a person who was disappointed about my interest in probability and statistics
because "the laws of statistics seems to me absolutely silly. Why, playing lotto, should
one number have a higher chance of being extracted than the other numbers, if it has not
shown up in the previous weeks?". Unfortunately, the number of reasonable persons of
this kind is small, and most people believe in the mass-media interpretation of statistics
'laws'.
      Note that the reason why, contrary to what we have seen above, the observation
of the relative frequency fw0 does not change our belief in the future event is because
in this example we are sure about the urn composition. This is equivalent to applying
Bayes' theorem with a prior /o(p) = 6(p — po), where <$() is the Dirac delta.
150          Bayesian   reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


  • Bernoulli's theorem cannot be used to justify the frequentistic definition
    of probability, since it is a theorem of probability theory, and hence
    cannot be used to define the basic concept of that theory, as sharply
    pointed out by de Finetti [16]:

        "For those who seek to connect the notion of probability with that of
       frequency, results which relate probability and frequency in some way
       (and especially those results like the 'law of large numbers') play a
       pivotal role, providing support for the approach and for the identifica­
       tion of the concepts. Logically speaking, however, one cannot escape
       from the dilemma posed by the fact that the same thing cannot both
       be assumed Erst as a definition and then proved as a theorem; nor can
       one avoid the contradiction that arises from a definition which would
       assume as certain something that the theorem only states to be very
       probable."

  • Another law sometimes claimed to connect frequency with probability
    is the 'empirical law of chance'. In simple words, it says that "in all
    cases in which we are able to evaluate probability by symmetry and we
    can perform a large number of experiments, we note that the relative
    frequency approaches the probability." This 'law' is meaningless. It
    is just empirical evidence that Bernoulli's theorem 'works', since large
    deviations are very rare.


After having analyzed the special case of a precise value of p = po, let us
see what happens if we include our uncertainty about it. Using the general
rules of probability we get, for the number of successes X:




                          f(x)=      f f(x\p)f(p)dp.                            (7.36)
                                    Jo


Following what we did in Sec. 6.6, let us assume that our knowledge about
p comes from a previous experiment of no trials in which XQ = xo successes
were recorded (and before that experiment we considered all values of p
equally likely). Thinking of ni future trials, our beliefs about the number
                               Counting          experiments                            151


       Table 7.1 Example of predictive distribution of the number of successes
       in n\ trials, having observed xo successes in no previous trials performed
       under the same conditions.
                              /(*1   n o , x o , n i = 10) in %
                  Xl   f xo = 1      \ xo = 10           f xo = 100     f xo = 1000
        Xx        ni   I n0 = 2      [no = 20           \n0 = 200      \ n 0 = 2000
          0  0              3.85               0.42             0.12            0.10
          1 0.1             6.99               2.29             1.11            0.99
          2  0.2            9.44               6.51             4.67            4.42
          3  0.3           11.19             12.54             11.88           11.74
          4  0.4           12.24             18.07             20.21           20.48
          5  0.5           12.59             20.33             24.02           24.55
          6  0.6           12.24             18.07             20.21           20.48
          7  0.7           11.19             12.54             11.88           11.74
          8  0.8            9.44               6.51             4.67            4.42
          9  0.9            6.99               2.29             1.11            0.99
         10  1              3.84               0.42             0.12            0.10
          E(X0                 5                    5              5               5
             <T[XX]         2.64               1.87             1.62            1.58




of successes Xx that we shall observe are given by

                                          r»i!
     /(xi | n 0 ,ar 0 ,ni) = / —-                   pXl{l-p)ni~Xl
                             Jo xx\ ( " 1     ~Xi)\
                                    (n 0 + 1)!
                                                    pXo(l-p)n°-Xodp                   (7.37)
                                 x0\ (n 0 - x0)\
                             ni! (n 0 + 1)! (x 0 + xi)! (n 0 + nx - x0 - xi)\
                              xi!(ni - x i ) ! x 0 ! ( n 0 - x 0 ) ! ( n 0 + nx + 1)!
                                                                                      (7.38)

This formula allows a straightforward calculation of the probability of the
relative frequency Xx/nx- Table 7.1 shows f(xx | n 0 , x 0 , n i ) for nx = 10
and some values of no and xo such that x0/no = 1/2. Expected value
and standard deviation of Xx are also shown (expected value and standard
deviation of the relative frequencies are obtained dividing these numbers
by m = 10).
    For large values of no the distribution of Xx tends to a binomial distri­
bution of p = 1/2, consistent with the fact that we are becoming practical
certain about the value of p. For small values of no the distribution is
broader than the binomial. Equation (7.38) can easily be extended to the
more general case which takes into account a prior of p described by a beta
152           Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical                introduction


function of parameters r, and st (see Sec. 7.1.3), obtaining
  -, |                     N        nil (n0 + n + Si - 1)1 (x0 + xi + ri - 1)\
 f(xi \rio,xo,ni,ri,Si)        = xi\(ni - x i ) ! ( a ; 0 +n- l)!(n 0 - x0 + Si - 1)!
                                    (n 0 + m - xQ ~ xi + Si - 1)!
                                                                                 (7.39)
                                        (n 0 + n i +r{ + st - 1)!
Finally, when the Gaussian approximations hold [i.e. no, XQ, no — XQ, n\,
n\ XQ/UQ and n\ (l — xo/no) are all larger than 0(10)] we recover Eq. (6.16),
with Xf referring to the number of successes xi, and where xp = xo, op =
i/zo/no (1 — xo/n0)n0 and Of = y/xo/no (1 — xo/no)ni.          Passing to the
relative frequencies and making use of Eqs. (6.17)-(6.18), we get

                  E(3±)=J*                                                                  (7.40)

                  o (XA         = >    (l - ^)    (-1 + ±) ,                                (7.41)
                    \nij          y n0 V    " o / Vno    n
                                                           iJ
which tend to Eqs. (7.30)-(7.31) for no —> oo (and calling n the number of
future trials).


7.4   Poisson distributed observables

As is well known, the typical application of the Poisson distribution is
in counting experiments such as source activity, cross-sections, etc. The
unknown parameter to be inferred is A [see Eq. (4.22)]. Applying the Bayes
formula we get

                                                " ' ~ X / o ( vA )
                          /(A \x,V)=      roo   J-     /        '        .                  (7.42)

Assuming / 0 (A) constant up to a certain \max               > x and making the integral
by parts we obtain

                          f(\\x,V) = *-^-                                                   (7.43)



                                                        \ n = 0 n'   )

where the last result has been obtained by integrating Eq. (7.43) also by
parts. Figure 7.2 shows some numerical examples. /(A) has the following
                           Counting experiments                           153



          1


        0.8
      f(A)
        0.6


        0.4


        0.2


          "0              5               10      .        15     20
                                                  A


                        Fig. 7.2   Examples of /(A 11;).


properties.

  • Expected value, variance and mode of the probability distribution are

                                    E(X)=x+l,                          (7.45)
                                   Var(A)=a:+l,                        (7.46)
                                      \m=x.                            (7.47)

    The fact that the best estimate of A in the Bayesian sense is not the
    intuitive value x but x + 1 should neither surprise, nor disappoint us.
    First, we should be used to distinguish of maximum belief (mode) from
    expected value (average) and "central value" (median). The reason
    why the expected value is shifted by one with respect to the mode is
    due to the uniform prior and the fact that A (contrary to /i of the
    Gaussian) is limited on the left side to 0. In a certain sense, "there
    are always more possible values of A on the right side than on the left
    side of x", and they pull the distribution to their side (the expression
    in quotation marks because we are dealing with infinites). Moreover,
    we should not forget that the full information is always given by /(A)
    and the use of the average is just a rough approximation. Finally, one
    as to notice that the difference between expected value and mode of A,
    expressed in units of the standard deviation, is 1/y/x + 1, and becomes
154            Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical        introduction


      immediately negligible with increasing x.
      When x becomes large we get

                                      E(A)    "^ ^ m — % ,                           (7.48)
                                      ar(A)   ~   A   m       — X j                  (7.49)
                                        <r\ « y/x,                                   (7.50)
                                         A ■~ Af(x, yfx).                            (7.51)

      Equation (7.50) is one of the most familiar formulae used by physicists
      to assess the uncertainty of a measurement, although it is sometimes
      misused. As we have seen for the binomial case [Eq. (7.14)], Eq. (7.49)
      can be easily obtained assuming Gaussian approximation of /(A | x, V),
      i.e.

                        V„-.,A) » -                       "*"$*•*>                   (7.52)


7.4.1     Observation       of zero     counts
Let us analyze the special case in which no event has been observed, i.e.
x = 0. First, it should be clear that our state of information is not equiva­
lent with not having performed the experiment. Very high values of A are
certainly ruled out. However, the precise inference on the low values of A
becomes highly sensitive to our priors. This is the typical problem in which
there is no single objective solution, and we shall come back to it in Chap­
ter 13. For the moment, instead of playing at random with mathematics,
let us assume that the experiment was planned with the hope of observing
something, i.e. that it could detect a handful of events within its lifetime.
With this hypothesis one may use any vague prior function not strongly
peaked at zero. We have already come across a similar case in Sec. 6.7,
concerning the upper limit of the neutrino mass. There it was shown that
reasonable hypotheses based on the positive attitude of the experimentalist
are almost equivalent and that they give results consistent with detector
performances. Let us use then the uniform distribution

                    f(X\x    = 0,V) =         e-x,                                   (7.53)
                                                          x
                   F(\\x     = 0,V) =             l-e- ,                             (7.54)
                                      A < 3 at 95 % probability.                     (7.55)

Note that many researchers are convinced (as I also was some years ago)
                                Counting experiments                      155




           f(X)




                          1 2       3                            X

               Fig. 7.3    Upper limit to A having observed 0 events.


that this 95% probability limit is due to the fact that f(x = 0 \V\=3) =
0.05 (the kind of arbitrary probability inversions criticized in Chapter 1).
Instead, this is just a numerical coincidence, due to the known property of
the exponential function under integration. What is bad is that the same
reasoning is extended to cases in which this coincidence does not hold. [As
a trivial example, think of a binomial likelihood with n and zero events
observed. The value pu, such that J f(p \ Bn, x = 0) dp = 0.05, does not
imply, in general, that f(x = 0 | BnPu) = 0.05.]


7.5   Conjugate prior of the Poisson likelihood

Formally, the prior conjugate of the Poisson likelihood is given by the
gamma distribution (Sec. 4.2), though this distribution is not as flexible
as the beta met in the binomial case (Sec. 7.1.3). We have in fact,

            /(A|a;,Gamma(cj,ri)) ex [Axe~A] x [A C i _ 1 e _ r i A]
                                          {xAx+ci-le-(r.-+l)A)          (756)

where c^ and r, are the initial parameters of the gamma distribution. The
final distribution is therefore a gamma with Cf = Ci + x and TJ = ri + \.
The case of a flat prior is reobtained for c = 1 and r —> 0.


7.6   Predicting future counts

We have already seen predictive distributions for the Gaussian and binomial
cases (see Sees. 6.6 and 7.3, respectively). Repeating the same reasoning
156            Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical     introduction


for the Poisson case, and taking directly into account a conjugate prior
modelled by a gamma distribution, we have
                                       />oo

            f(xi \x0,a,ri)      = /         f(xi\X)f(\\xo,Ci,ri)dX
                                  Jo
                                  T{x0 + Xl+ a) (l + n)x°+Ci
                                                                                   (7.57)
                                    x\T(x0+Ci)     (2 + ri )*o+*i+c;
                                   [with Ti > —2 and Ci > — (XQ + x\)],
where XQ refers to the past number of counts and x\ to the future one, and
the (usually satisfied) conditions on Ci and r, are important in order to get
the integral in such a closed form. In this case, expected value and variance
also have a closed form:

               E{Xi)    =    ^±£L                       ^ x   0   +l              (7.58)
                              1
                                + ri          flat    prior
                a{Xl) = P^Vci+x0                           >\/2yfxT+l              (7.59)
                        1 + ri                flat    prior
As usual, when xo is large, the Gaussian approximation holds, and we
recover, once again, Eq. (6.16), with Xf referring to the number of successes
xi, and where xp K xo, o~p = af ss y/x®. It follows that E(Xi) K XQ and
o-{X\) RS \/2y/xQ. Note the %/2 factor. It is not correct to state that, if
we have observed 100 counts in an experiment, we are 68% confident of
observing sa 100 ± 10 in another experiment performed under the same
conditions: the range should be ±14.


7.7     A deeper look to the Poissonian case

7.7.1    Dependence          on priors        — practical     examples
One may worry how much the result changes if different priors are used in
the analysis. Bearing in mind the rule of coherence, we are clearly interested
only in reasonable 4 priors.
    In frontier physics the choice of /o(A) = k is often not reasonable. For
example, searching for magnetic monopoles,5 one does not believe that
   4
     I insist on the fact that they must be reasonable, and not just any prior. The fact
that absurd priors give absurd results does not invalidate the inferential framework based
on subjective probability.
   5
     Many formulae of this and the following sections have been derived to answer some
question from colleagues of the MACRO underground experiment at Gran Sasso Labo­
ratory, Italy.
                             Counting       experiments                    157


A = 106 and A = 1 are equally possible. Realistically, one would expect to
observe, with the planned experiment and running time, 0(10) monopoles,
if they exist at all. We follow the same arguments of Sec. 6.7 (negative neu­
trino mass), modelling the prior beliefs of a community of rational people
who have planned and run the experiment. For reasons of mathematical
convenience, we model /o(A) with an exponential, but, extrapolating the
results of Sec. 6.7, it is easy to understand that the exact function is not
really crucial for the final result. The function


                              /o(A) = ^ e - V i ° ,                     (760)




with E 0 (A) = 10 and a0 (A) = 10 may be well suited to the case: the highest
beliefs are for small values of A, but also values up to 30 or 50 would not
be really surprising. We obtain the following results:



                 / ( A | x = 0)      r£\„                               (7.6i)
                                    Jo (.-OdA
                                  H     e   -^                         (7.62)
                         E(A)
                                  0.91
                  P(A < 2.7)
                                  95%
                            Au
                                  2.7 with 95% probability.             (7.63)

The result is very stable. Changing E0(A) from 'oo' to 10 has only a 10%
effect on the upper limit. As far as the scientific conclusions are concerned,
the two limit are "identical". For this reason one should not worry about
using a uniform prior, instead of complicating one's life to model a more
realistic prior.
    As an exercise, we can extend this result to a generic expected value of
events, still sticking to the exponential:


                              /„(A) = fe-V*. ,

which has an expected value A0. The uniform distribution is recovered for
158         Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical               introduction


A0 —» oo. We get:


                  f(X\x     = 0,A 0 ) oc e~x               —e~x/x"
                                                      A0
                  f(\\x     = 0, A 0 ) = (1 + A 0 ) e~x (!+*•>/*•
                                          1
                                       = _e-VA!
                                         A7
                               .,    1   1  1
                            wlth         =        +
                                    AT        i       A:
                  F ( A | z = 0,Ao) = 1 - e~x/x° .

The upper limit, at a probability level Pu, becomes:

                               Xu = -Ai ln(l - P „ ) .                                    (7.64)




7.7.2   Combination        of results from similar                     experiments
As seen for the cases of Gaussian and binomial likelihoods, results may be
combined in a natural way making an sequential use of Bayesian inference.
As a first case we assume several experiments having the same efficiency
and exposure time.

 • Prior knowledge:

                                             /o(A|/0);

 • Experiment 1 provides Datai:

                 /i(A | J 0 , Dataj) oc /(Dataj | A, I0) / 0 (A | J„);

 • Experiment 2 provides Data2:

               / 2 (A | J 0 , D a t a i . . . ) oc /(Data 2 | A, JD) / i (A | . . . ) ;



                              => / 2 (A | J 0 , Datai, Data 2 ).
                            Counting     experiments                                 159


 • Combining n similar independent experiments we get

                                        n
                          f(X\x)cxl[f(xi\X)f0(X)
                                       i=l
                                   oc/(£|A)/o(A)



                                   <xe-" A A^=i X i /o(A).                        (7.65)

    Then it is possible to evaluate expected value, standard deviation, and
    probability intervals.

As an exercise, let us analyze the two extreme cases, starting from a uniform
prior:

Zero observations: if none of the n similar experiments has observed
   events we have

          /(A | n expts, 0 evts) = n e " " A
          F(X | n expts, 0 evts)
                                       ln(l - Pu)
                                       —i              W1 th   probability Pu .


Large number of counts: If the number of observed events is large (and
   the prior flat), the result will be normally distributed:

                                /(A)~Af(MA,^).

    Then, in this case it is convenient to evaluate expected value and stan­
    dard deviation using general properties of the (multi-variate) Gaussian
    distribution shown in Sec. 4.3. (This is equivalent to recover a well-
    known maximum likelihood result, but under well-stated assumptions
    and with a more natural interpretation of the result, as discussed in
    Sec. 2.9.) From the maximum of /(A), in correspondence of A — ATO,
    we easily get:


                          H\ = E(A) ss Am =
160            Bayesian      reasoning in data analysis: A critical      introduction


      and from the second derivative of In /(A) around the maximum:

                a 2 In/(A)                -n2
                   <9A   2             En
                                                                     l
                                                2,    ■ -      >
                                               5 2 ln/(A)                i E?=i **
                                                                         7i     n


                                        y/n




7.7.3     Combination          of results:       general      case
The previous case is rather artificial and can be used, at most, to combine
several measurements of the same experiment repeated n times, each with
the same running time. In general, experiments differ in size, efficiency, and
running time. A result on A is no longer meaningful. The quantity which
is independent of these contingent factors is the rate, related to A by

                                                A       A
                                              eSAT       £'
where e indicates the efficiency, S the generic 'size' (either area or volume,
depending on whatever is relevant for the kind of detection) and AT the
running time: all the factors have been grouped into a generic 'integrated
luminosity' C which quantify the effective exposure of the experiment.
   As seen in the previous case, the combined result can be achieved using
Bayes' theorem sequentially, but now one has to pay attention to the fact
that:

  • the observable is Poisson distributed, and each experiment can infer a
    A parameter;
  • the result on A must be translated 6 into a result on r.

Starting from a prior on r (e.g. a monopole flux) and going from experiment
1 to n we have
  6
    This two-step inference is not really needed, but it helps to follow the inferential
flow. One could think more directly of
                              Counting         experiments                                              161


 • from fo{r) and L\ we get /o(A); then, from the data we perform the
   inference on A and then on r:

                      /o(r)&£i->/0l(A)
                           Datai -> /i(A|Datai,/ 0 l (A))
                                       ->/i(r|Datai,>Ci,/o(r)).

 • The process is repeated for the second experiment:

              /i(r)&£2->/o2(A)
                  Data 2 -» / 2 (A | Data 2 ,/ 0 2 (A))
                           ->/2(r|Data2,£2,/i(r))
                           ->■ / 2 ( r | ( D a t a i , £ i ) , ( D a t a 2 , £ 2 ) , / 0 ( r ) ) ,

 • and so on for all the experiments.
Let us see in detail the case of null observation in all experiments (a; = 0 =
{ 0 , 0 , . . . , 0}), starting from a uniform distribution.

Experiment 1:

                 /i(A|:ci=0)=e-A
                 f1(r\x1=0)=C1e-c>r                                                                  (7.66)
                              rUl = ~ " "                 at 95% probability.                        (7.67)
                                               £i
Experiment 2:
                                                A         c-i
                                                                A
                                    f°2 = 7 ^ e           £2
                                                -*-2
                     h(A I a;2 = 0) oc e    7 - e £2 oc e V £ 2 /
                                           £2
               / 2 (r I xx = ic2 = 0) = ( A + £ 2 ) e " ( ^ + ^ ) *.


Experiment n:

                   /„(r |a; = 0,/o(r) =k) = Y,Cie-^Cir                                  .            (7.68)

The final result is insensitive to the data grouping. As the intuition sug­
gests, many experiments give the same result of a single experiment with
equivalent luminosity. To get the upper limit, we calculate, as usual, the
162          Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical            introduction


cumulative distribution and require a certain probability Pu for r to be
below ru [i.e. Pu = P(r < ru)]:

                 Fn(r\x    = 0,/ o (r) = k) = l - e - ^ C i r
                                            _       -ln(l-Pu)
                                              ru
                                               ~        Y.ib
                                              1 _    - Z i b
                                             ru   ln(l - Pu)

                                                     = £ ln(l~- cP )    u


                                                           Ls   r   '
                                                            i

obtaining the following rule for the combination of upper limits on rates:

                                  1
                                      U       -     ' Ui
                                             I

We have considered here only the case in which no background is expected,
but it is not difficult to take background into account, following what has
been said in Sec. 7.7.5.


7.7.4   Including    systematic           effects
A last interesting case is when there are systematic errors of uncertain size
in the detector performance. Independently of where systematic errors may
enter, the final result will be an uncertainty on C. In the most general case,
the uncertainty can be described by a probability density function:

               / ( £ ) = / ( £ | best knowledge on experiment).

    For simplicity we analyze here only the case of a single experiment. In
the case of many experiments, we only need to use the Bayesian inference
several times, as has often been shown in the previous chapters.
    Following the general lines given in Sec. 2.10.3, the problem can be
solved by considering the conditional probability, obtaining :

                    f(r | Data) = f f(r | Data, C) f{C) d £ .                          (7.70)

The case of absolutely precise knowledge of £ is recovered when / ( £ ) is a
Dirac delta.
                               Counting    experiments                              163




                        Idf


                -0.0005
                 -0.001
                -0.0015
                 -0.002
                -0.0025


Fig. 7.4 Inference on the rate of a process, with and without taking into account
systematic effects: upper plot: difference between f(r \ x = 0 , £ = 1.0 ± 0.1) and
/ ( r | x = 0, C = 1 ± 0), using a normal distribution of C; lower plot: integral of the
difference, to give a direct idea of the variation of the upper limit.


    Let us treat in some more detail the case of null observation (x = 0).
For each possible value of £ one has an exponential of expected value l / £
[see Eq. (7.66)]. Each of the exponentials is weighted with / ( £ ) . This
means that, if / ( £ ) is rather symmetrical around its barycenter (expected
value), in a first approximation the more or less steep exponentials will
compensate, and the result of integral (7.70) will be close to f(r) calculated
in the barycenter of £, i.e. in its nominal value £ 0 :

           / ( r | Data) = f f(r | Data, £) / ( £ ) d£ « f(r \ Data, £ 0 )

             ru | Data w ru \ Data, £ 0 .

To make a numerical example, let us consider £ = 1.0±0.1 (arbitrary units),
with / ( £ ) following a normal distribution. The upper plot of Fig. 7.4 shows
164            Bayesian    reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


the difference between f(r | Data) calculated applying Eq. (7.70) and the
result obtained with the nominal value £ 0 = 1:

                df = f(r | x = 0, / ( £ ) ) - f(r \ x = 0, £ = 1.0)                (7.71)
                    = ff(r      | x = 0, £) / ( £ ) d£ - e~r .                     (7.72)

df is negative up to r w 2, indicating that systematic errors normally
distributed tend to increase the upper limit. But the size of the effect is
very tiny, and depends on the probability level chosen for the upper limit.
This can be seen better in the lower plot of Fig. 7.4, which shows the
integral of the difference of the two functions. The maximum difference is
for r « 2. As far as the upper limits are concerned, we obtain (the large
number of — non-significant — digits is only to observe the behavior in
detail):

                          ru(x = 0, £ = 1 ± 0, at 95%) = 2.996
                  r„(x = 0,£ = 1.0 ± 0 . 1 , at 95%) = 3 . 0 4 2 .

An uncertainty of 10% due to systematics produces less than a 0.5% vari­
ation of the limits. For curiosity, here are also the 90% probability limits:

                          ru(x = 0, £ = 1 ± 0, at 90%) = 2.304
                  ru(x = 0,£ = 1.0 ± 0 . 1 , at 90%) = 2.330.

   To simplify the calculation (and also to get a feeling of what is going
on) we can use some approximations.

(1) Since the dependence of the upper limit of r from l / £ is given by
                                        _ - ln(l - Pu)


      the upper limit averaged with the belief on £ is given by

                    ru = - ln(l - Pu) E(^\=               I !/(£) d£ .

    We need to solve an integral simpler than in the previous case. For
    the above example of £ = 1.0 ± 0.1 we obtain r„ = 2.326 at 90% and
    ru = 3.026 at 95%.
(2) Finally, as a real rough approximation, we can take into account the
    small asymmetry of ru around the value obtained at the nominal value
                            Counting    experiments                        165


    of C averaging the two values of C at ±ac from C0

                   _      -ln(l-Pu)
                                                      +
                           ln(l-P„)
                                          1+

    We obtain numerically identical results to the previous approximation.

The main conclusion is that the uncertainty due to systematics plays only
a second-order role, and it can be neglected for all practical purposes. A
second observation is that this uncertainty increases slightly the limits if
/ ( £ ) is distributed normally, but the effect could also be negative if the
/ ( £ ) is asymmetric with positive skewness.
      As a more general remark, one should not forget that the upper limit has
the meaning of an uncertainty and not of a value of quantity. Therefore, as
nobody really cares about an uncertainty of 10 or 20% on the uncertainty,
the same is true for upper/lower limits. At the per cent level it is mere nu­
merology (I have calculated it at the 10~ 4 level just to check the numerical
sensitivity).


7.7.5   Counting       measurements       in the presence     of   back­
        ground
As an example of a different kind of systematic effect, let us think of count­
ing experiments in the presence of background. For example we are search­
ing for a new particle, we make some selection cuts and count x events. But
we also expect an average number of background events AB 0 ±<JB, where as
is the standard uncertainty of AB 0 , not to be confused with A/ABJ. What
can we say about As, the true value of the average number associated with
the signal? First we will treat the case in which the determination of the
expected number of background events is well known (crs/Ajg,, < 1), and
then the general case.

0B/ABO <    1   Being the two processes incoherent, the true value of the
    sum of signal and background is given by their sum: A = As 4- XB0 ■
    The likelihood is

                               P(X\\)     = ?—-.                        (7.73)
166            Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical                                     introduction


      Applying Bayes' theorem we have
                                              e   -(AB0+As)(AiJo+As)z/o(As)
             f(Xs\x,XBo)      =        / ~    e-(ABo+As) (ABO +                      As)      x   / o ( A s ) dXs   ■

                                                                                                                        (7.74)

      Choosing again f0(Xs) uniform (in a reasonable interval) this gets sim­
      plified. The integral in the denominator can be calculated easily by
      parts and the final result is
                                                   e Xs                  +     As)
                      m i          \     ^         ~           ( AB °                *                                  WTO
                     f(\s\x,XBo)              =                         — ^               ,                             (7.75)
                                                       J
                                                          " L^n=0             n!
                                                                             x
                     F(Xs\x,XBo)              = 1
                                                           e            E^ " n=0
                                                                              =u
                                                                                         A.       "!        •           (7.76)
                                                                         Z^n=0            n!

      From Eqs. (7.75)-(7.76) it is possible to calculate in the usual way the
      best estimate and the credibility intervals of As. Two particular cases
      are of interest:
      • If XB0 = 0 then formulae (7.43)-(7.44) are recovered. In such a case
        one measured count is enough to claim for a signal (if somebody is
        willing to believe that really XB0 = 0 without any uncertainty...).
      • If x = 0 then

                                             f(X\x,XBa)=:e-Xs,                                                          (7.77)

        independently of Xg0. This behavior is not really obvious, and I
        must confess that it puzzled me for years, until Astone and Pizzella
        finally showed that the result is logically correct [72]. For further de­
        tails about this result and for comparisons with what other methods
        produce, see Sec. 2.9.2 of Ref. [11]. It is interesting to note (Table
        2 of Ref. [11]) that the PDG [51] blessed prescription [73] yields the
        manifestly absurd result that, given a null observation, the upper
        limit decreases with increasing background (a noisy measurement
        produces a tighter bound on a searched for rare phenomenon than
        a clean measurement!).
Any g(Xsa) '■ In the general case, the true value of the average number of
  background events XB is unknown. We only known that it is distributed
  around XB0 with standard deviation erg and probability density func­
  tion g(Xs), not necessarily a Gaussian. What changes with respect
  to the previous case is the initial distribution, now a joint function of
                           Counting      experiments                                             167


Xs and of XB- Assuming XB and As independent, the prior density
function is
                         /o(A s ,A B ) = / 0 ( A s ) g o ( A B ) .                           (7.78)

We leave / 0 in the form of a joint distribution to indicate that the result
we shall get is the most general for this kind of problem. The likelihood,
on the other hand, remains the same as in the previous example. The
inference of Xs is done in the usual way, applying Bayes' theorem and
marginalizing with respect to As:

  f n   .   „   n   ss         J"e-(*B+^)(AB+Asr/o(As,AB)dAB
                          JJ e -(A B +A s ) (AfJ +     A s ) x/ o ( A s j Afi) d A s d A e   •
                                                                   (7.79)
The previous case [formula (7.75)] is recovered if the only value allowed
for XB is XBQ and fQ(Xs) is uniform:
                         fo{Xs,XB)=k5(XB-XBa).                                               (7.80)
This page is intentionally left blank
                                  Chapter 8

            Bypassing Bayes' theorem
             for routine applications

                                         "Let us consider a dimension Jess mass,
                                  suspended from an inextensible massless wire,
                                           free to oscillate without friction... "
                                                                 (Any textbook)


    In the previous chapters we have seen how to use the general for­
mula (5.3) for practical applications. Unfortunately, when the problem
becomes more complicated one starts facing integration problems. For this
reason approximate and numerical methods are generally used. We shall
concentrate our attention on approximations important for everyday use of
probabilistic inference. Numerical methods, which in the most complicated
problems mean Monte Carlo techniques, is a science in its own right and
we shall not attempt to introduce it here, other than to give some hints
and references in the appropriate places.



8.1   Maximum likelihood and least squares as particular
      cases of Bayesian inference

Let us continue with the case in which priors are so uninformative that
a uniform distribution is a practical choice. Calling 6 the quantities to
infer (i.e. the model parameters — the reason for this change of symbols
is to use a notation which most readers are used to) and neglecting for a
while systematic effects (i.e. we drop the influence quantities fa) Eq. (5.2)
becomes:


         f{0\x,I)   <x f(x\0,I)    f0(O\T) oc. f(x\0,I)     = C(0;x),         (8.1)

                                      169
170             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical    introduction


where, we remember, the likelihood C{9\ x) is a mathematical function of 9
(note that this function has no p.d.f. meaning and therefore normalization
does not apply).
    The set of 9 we believe most is that which maximizes C(9; x), a result
known as the Maximum Likelihood principle. Here it has been reobtained as
a special case of a more general framework, under clearly stated hypotheses,
without the need of appealing principles. 1
    Also the usual Least Square formulae are easily derived if we take the
well-known case of data points {xi,yi}, whose true values are related by
a deterministic function /j,yi = y(fiXi,9) and with Gaussian errors only on
the ordinates, i.e. we consider Xi ta fiXi. In the case of independence of the
measurements, the likelihood dominated result becomes

                                                  (Vi-y(xi,9)y
                  f(0\x,y,I)      oc J J e x p                                       (8.2)
                                                        2<
or

                   f(91x,y,I)      oc C{9;x,y)=       exp [- X 2 /2j ,              (8.3)

with

                           X2 = X>-i/O*,0)) 2 /<.>                                  (8-4)
                                    i

being the well-known 'chi-square'. Maximizing the likelihood is equivalent
to minimizing the x 2 and the most believed value of 9 is easily obtained,
analytically in easy cases, or numerically for more complex ones. As far as
the uncertainty on 0 is concerned, the widely used (and misused! — see
Sec. 12.2) Ax 2 = 1 rule, or the




formula, with V(0) being the covariance matrix of 0, are just consequences
of a multi-variate Gaussian distribution of 0 (and, hence a parabolic shape
of x 2 )- In fact, the generic multi-variate Gaussian p.d.f. of n variables z
    1
      There is another principle, which is considered to be a very good feature by frequen-
tists, though not all frequentistic methods respect it [11]: the Likelihood Principle:   In
practice, it says that the result of an inference should not depend on multiplicative fac­
tors of the likelihood functions. This 'principle' too arises automatically in the Bayesian
framework.
               Bypassing Bayes' theorem for routine       applications      171


with expected values E(z) = [iz and covariance matrix V is

              f(z) = (27r)- n / 2 |V|- 1 / 2 exp   -A^V^A                 (8.6)
                                                      2
where A stands for the set of differences Zi — \iZi and | V| is the determinant
of V. Taking the logarithm of f(z) and indicating A T V~" 1 A by x 2 (the
usual chi-square) and all terms that do not depend on z by k, we have

            \nf(Z)   = -1-x2   +k                                         (8.7)

                     = - \ E (* - ^ ) (F_1)«(** - ^-) + *.               (8-8)
from which Eq. (8.5) follows for the variables z = 6.
    In routine applications the hypotheses which lead to the maximum like­
lihood and least squares formulae often hold. But when these hypotheses
are not justified we need to characterize the result by the multi-dimensional
posterior distribution f(9), going back to more general Eqs. (8.3), (8.1),
or (5.2), depending on the hypotheses and approximations valid in each
practical C S J S G , CLS sketched in Fig. 2.2.
    The important conclusion from this section is that, as was the case for
the 'definitions of probability', Bayesian methods often contain well-known
conventional methods, but without introducing them as principles. The
practitioner acquires then a superior degree of awareness about the range
of validity of the methods and might as well use standard formulae with
Bayesian spirit and with a more natural interpretation of the results, since
we can speak about probability of model parameters, which is the usual
way physicists think.
    It is surprising that this rather natural thinking does not belong to the
standard education of physicists, or at least this has been the case for most
of the last century. But, as usual, there have been remarkable exceptions.
Here is a recollection of a former Fermi student [74]:

    "In my thesis I had to find the best 3-parameter fit to my data and the
    errors of those parameters in order to get the 3 phase shifts and their
    errors. Fermi showed me a simple analytic method. At the same time
    other physicists were using and publishing other cumbersome methods.
    Also Fermi taught me a general method, which he called Bayes Theorem,
    where one could easily derive the best-fit parameters and their errors as
    a special case of the maximum-likelihood method. I remember asking
172             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical introduction

      Fermi how and where he learned this. I expected him to answer R.A.
      Fisher or some other textbook on mathematical statistics. Instead he
      said 'perhaps it was Gauss'. I suspect he was embarrassed to admit that
      he had derived it all from his 'Bayes Theorem'."


8.2     Linear fit

Let us see, as a simple example, the case of a linear dependence between
the true value of two quantities, i.e. fiy = m^x + c, which fits at best n
data points {xi, yi, a{\, where the symbol o~i stands, for cryi of the previous
section. Since there is no error on the X values, we can identify the observed
Xi with fiXi, reducing the assumed law to fiy{ — mxi + c. We consider our
knowledge about m and c sufficiently vague that a uniform prior can be
used. Equation (8.2) becomes in this specific case

                                                          (j/i     -mxi-c)
            / ( m , c | x, y,   <T,   I) = K J J exp                               (8.9)
                                                                 2 of

                                                                             cf
                                       = if exp
                                                   -j£ (Vi         mx;
                                                                                  (8.10)


where K is a normalization constant. In principle, this is the end of the
problem, at least conceptually: the constant K can be evaluated numeri­
cally; f(m,c) can be plotted and inspected; expected value, standard devi­
ation and all probability regions of interest can be calculated numerically.
Nevertheless, formulae to calculate location and dispersion parameters of
f(m,c) can be useful for routine use. The mode, i.e. the set of parameter
we believe in most, can be obtained analytically from the conditions

                                         df(m,c)
                                                    = 0                           (8.11)
                                            dm
                                         df(m,c)
                                                    = 0.                          (8.12)
                                            dc

Alternatively, and with identical results, we can find the minimum of

                                   2 _ Ei(j/i -mxi          -c)2
                                  X                                               (8.13)
                 Bypassing Bayes' theorem for routine       applications                173


with analogous conditions

                       dx2 _ d Y^iiVi -mxi-c)2                     _Q
                                                                                     (8.14)
                       dm    dm         of
                       dx2 _ d T,i(yi -mxi-c)2                 _
                                                                                     (8.15)
                        dc   dc         of

Ignoring irrelevant factors, we get
                                                 2
                       V ^ xiVi        V~"* Xi       \~~^ Xi        n                (8.16)


                                                                                     (8.17)


where all summations run from 1 to n. Dividing all terms by ^                   "7, the
equations to be solved can be rewritten as

                                  x~y — m x2 — ex — 0                                  (8.18)
                                     y-mx-c          = 0,                            (8.19)

where x, x2, y and x~y are the averages weighted with u>i = I/of                       \x =
(X)i x i/ a i)/(Yli l / ° f )> a n d s o o n ] - Solving the two equations we get:

                           mode(m) = XL~**                                           (8.20)
                                       x2 — x
                            mode(c) =y — 5; mode(m).                                  (8-21)

The direct calculation of the expected value is usually much more compli­
cated, because one has to perform an integral. The same is true for the
standard deviation. At this point we can simply assume that f(m, c) is
approximately a bivariate Gaussian p.d.f. to obtain:

                                  E(m) = mode(m)                                     (8.22)
                                    E(c) = mode(c).                                  (8.23)

Indeed, in the case of a linear fit, the Gaussian solution is exact, because
the term at the exponent of f(m, c) can be reduced to a negative quadratic
form and, finally, to the canonical bivariate Gaussian form (4.80). 2 To
     This property holds not only in linear fits, but also for all models in which the
parameters appear linearly in y(mx,0).  In other words, linear dependence on 9, not on
x, is required.
174            Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical        introduction


calculate variances and covariance we can make use of Eq. (8.5), obtaining


           V " W ) =              '"       ' ' | = ( E - i i r                *)     (8-24)


and, hence,

                    V
                          M       ~    ^      (        ^    1     .                  (8-25)

i.e.

               <r(m) =        _        . /=- n -       =    .—_-      4   /^-T-       (8.26)


                a(c) = Vx2 a(m) = ^ = ^ =                        /——                 (8.27)
                                  sj\-x2 jx2                    V ^*^?

              p(m,c) = - - J = = -                 f       _2 •                      (8.28)

If the standard deviations which model the j/j are all equal, 1/ E i l / ° f
becomes equal to a2/n, showing clearly that the uncertainty on the param­
eters depend on a and -Jn. Note also the dependence of a{m) and a(c) on
-v/Var(aiy = v i 2 — x2, the standard deviation of the statistical distribution
of the data points on the rc-axis.3 ^/Var(a;) can be associated to the intu­
itive concept of 'lever arm' of the data points: the parameter of the straight
line are better determined if the measurements are performed over a wide
range. If the lever arm vanishes, then a{m) and <r(c) diverge, unless all data
points are concentrated at X = 0. In this latter case (x = x2 = Var(a;) = 0,
but x I x2 -» 1) Eq. (8.27) shows that c is indeed well measured, as it is
easy to understand.
    A few other remarks are important for practical applications: The corre­
lation coefficient p(m, c) vanishes if the fit is performed in the barycenter of
the data points. In the case when the Oi are all believed to be equal (though
unknown) the formulae for calculating the 'best values' of the parameters
do not depend on a, and 'un-weighted' least square formulae are recovered.
An initially unknown common a can be inferred from the same data set
       3
    This standard deviation should not be confused with the standard deviation de­
scribing the error on X, which has been assumed to be negligible in this model. For this
reason it has been indicated by y / Var(a!).
                  Bypassing Bayes' theorem for routine applications                                    175

using Bayesian reasoning, as will be shown in a while, or estimated from
the residuals with respect to the best fit (a2 RS Y^iiVi ~ E {m)yi - E(c)] 2 /n)
— the two results coincide for a large data set, where 'large' could mean
just a few dozen data points).


8.3   Linear fit with errors on both axes

If the x-values are also affected by independent Gaussian errors, the likeli­
hood of observing the data points becomes

        f(xi,yt     |HXi,m,c)= f(xi | p x i ) ■ f(Vi I^x { ,m,c)
                                                              (Xi -    flXi)2
                                                    exp
                                          2-KGXi                 2<4,
                                               1               (Vi -TUflXi         -C)2
                                                        exp                 2                     , (8.29)
                                             2 7Tcryi                  2a    Yi


which depends on the unknown fixt ■ These values can be inferred, together
with m and c, from the data:

        f(Hx,m,c\x,y)            oc nf{xi,yi\nxi,m,c)                 ■f0(tix,m,c).                 (8.30)

Marginalization over the ^            yields the result searched for:

                     f{m,c\x,y)       oc / f(fj,x,m,c\         x,y) dfix ■                          (8.31)

Assuming a uniform f0(iJ,x,m,c),               we get the following result:
(1) if oxi ~+ 0 the Gaussian distribution describing the probability of the
    observed Xi around fiXi tends to Dirac delta's 5(xt — /xxj and the
    integral gives

                                                1               (j/i -mxi         -c) 2 " 1
              f(m,c\x,y)          oc J J -              exp                                   ,     (8.32)
                                      i      '2 ix ay                  24.
    thus recovering Eq. (8.10).
(2) In the general case we have
                                                                       (j/i           -mxi-c) 2 1
       f(m,c\x,y)       oc J J                                exp
                                   /2~7r Jjoy. + m2ax_                 2{aYi          +m2a2Xi)\

                                                                                                     5.33)
176             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


      Essentially, ay{ is replaced by an effective standard deviation which
      is the quadratic sum of ay{ with ax{ rescaled ('propagated') with the
      derivative dY/dX calculated in Xi (equal to m in the linear case). This
      observation allows this result to be used in nonlinear cases, too, at least
      as an approximate method.
      Calculating expected values and covariance matrix of m and c can be
      more complicated in this case, but this is just a technical question.
      As stressed several times, the full solution is given by Eq. (8.33), after
      normalization. As an approximation, expected values and covariance
      matrix can be determined iteratively, evaluating E(m) neglecting axt
      and using this value in Eqs. (8.20-8.20). Usually, the convergence is
      so fast that one can estimate m graphically ('by eye'), and the first
      iteration is accurate enough.


8.4     M o r e complex cases

The aim of Sees. 8.1 and 8.2 was to show how to reproduce well-known
formulae starting from general Bayesian ideas, under a certain number of
well-defined conditions, including the uniform prior about the fit parame­
ters. If some of these hypotheses do not hold because, for example, there
are constraints on the value of the parameter, or the error function is not
Gaussian, the reader now knows what to do, at least in principle. As an ex­
ample of a bit more complicated situation, the case of non-negligible error
on the x-values was analyzed in detail in Sec. 8.3. As has been mentioned
previously several times (I really want to stress this) nowadays, given the
power of numerical and computational methods, it is not essential to arrive
at nice closed formulae for the expected values and covariance matrix of
the parameters.
    Let us see, for example, what happens if we do not know the values of cr,
which enter in the fit, but we have good reason to think ('we believe') that
they are the same for all yi. We use the data to infer a too, and Eq. (8.10)
becomes

                                                    (yi - m x i - c) 2
        *t         i
        f(m,c,a\x,y,I)
                          n      K

                              = — exp
                                <7
                                          4£                              /oW,
                                                                                 (8.34)

where /o(c) has been written explicitly, to remind us that we should at
least constrain a to be positive, and the 1/cr™ factor has been made explicit
                Bypassing Bayes' theorem for routine   applications              177


since it can no longer be absorbed by the normalization constant. The
inference on the fit parameters and on a is achieved with marginalizations:


                f(m,c\x,y,I)      = \ f(m,c,a\x,y,/)da                        (8.35)

                   /(cr | x, y, I) = / f(m, c,a\x,     y, I) dm dc.           (8.36)


If we think that a is not constant, but, for example, depends linearly on x, it
is enough to replace a with a o + a Xi in Eq. (8.34), infer f(m, c, ao, a \ x, y, I)
and perform the marginalizations of interest.
    Finally, I would like to point out that Bayesian methods are particularly
suited to solving more complex cases of 'regression'. We cannot enter here
into advanced applications, and I recommend Refs. [75,76] as a starting
points.



8.5   Systematic errors and 'integrated likelihood'

Systematic effects are easily included. Calling, as usual, h the influence
quantities, we have


  f(0 | x, h, I) oc f{x | 0, h, I) fo(01 /) oc f{x | 0, h, I) = £(0; x, h),   (8.37)


from which


               fi0\x,i)xJfix\e,h,i)foie\i)foih\i)dh

                           oc fci6;x,h)foi0)dh = CIi9;x) .                    (8.38)


All approximate results of the previous section are recovered, just replacing
the likelihood with what is sometimes called, incorrectly, integrated likeli­
hood, in practice an average likelihood weighted with the p.d.f. of h. In
real cases the integral must often be performed by Monte Carlo and all
expected values (together with mode, variance, covariances and probability
intervals) can only be performed numerically, but the simplicity of the basic
reasoning still holds.
178          Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


8.6    Linearization of the effects of influence quantities and
       approximate formulae

It is important to derive the approximation rules consistent with the
Bayesian approach to handle uncertainties due to systematic errors for ev­
eryday use. The resulting formulae will be compared with the ISO recom­
mendations [5] and suggestions about the modelling of uncertainty influence
quantities ('systematic effects') will be given.
    Let us ignore for a while all quantities of influence which could pro­
duce unknown systematic errors. In this case Eq. (5.3) can be replaced by
Eq. (5.4), which can be further simplified if we remember that correlations
between the results are originated by unknown systematic errors. In the
absence of these, the joint distribution of all quantities n is simply the
product of marginal ones:

                             /*(/*) = Ilfofo)'                                (8-39)
                                         i

with

                          JR. (Vi) = fRi (m I xu h0).                          (8.40)

The symbol fj^ (fa) indicates that we are dealing with raw values evaluated
at h — h0 (the choice of the adjective 'raw' will become clearer in a while).
Since for any variation of h the inferred values of fa will change, it is
convenient to name with the same subscript R the quantities obtained for
h0:

                            /*(/*)—>/*(/**)■                                  (8-41)


   Let us indicate with /JR ; and a^         the best estimates and the standard
uncertainty of the raw values:

                               fiRi=E(iiRi)                                   (8.42)
                                 2
                               o Ri=Vax(jjiRi).                               (8.43)

For any possible configuration of conditioning hypotheses h, corrected val­
ues fa are obtained:

                               Mi = Mi?;      +9i{h).                         (8.44)
               Bypassing Bayes' theorem for routine applications           179


The function which relates the corrected value to the raw value and to the
systematic effects has been denoted by gt so as not to be confused with a
probability density function. Expanding Eq. (8.44) in series around h0 we
finally arrive at the expression which will allow us to make the approximate
evaluations of uncertainties:




(All derivatives are evaluated at {^.R;,/io}- To simplify the notation a
similar convention will be used in the following formulae.)
    Neglecting the terms of the expansion above the first order, and taking
the expected values, we get


                   pi = E(fii)
                    « fa ,                                              (8.46)
                  < =E[(/i i -E^]) 2 ]

                      ~ < + E l Tit: J ah

                                                     Plm Ohi Ghm \ I    (8.47)


         Cav(fn,Hj) =E[(JH-       E[/ii])(/ij - Efa])]




                         { +2 ,s(H)
                                              d9j
                                                     Plm <Th, Ohm } ■    (8.48)
                                              dhr,
                                      v
                         k       Km       '

The terms included within {•} vanish if the unknown systematic errors are
uncorrelated, and the formulae become simpler. Unfortunately, very often
this is not the case, as when several calibration constants are simultaneously
obtained from a fit (for example, in most linear fits slope and intercept have
a correlation coefficient close to -0.9).
    Sometimes the expansion (8.45) is not performed around the best values
of h but around their nominal values, in the sense that the correction for
the known value of the systematic errors has not yet been applied (see
180           Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical               introduction


Sec. 6.9). In this case Eq. (8.45) should be replaced by

                                                                                           (8.49)

where the subscript N stands for nominal. The best value of fii is then



                           ^ +E (E^( ft '-^))
                        = pRi + E ^ < ■                                                    (8.50)

Instead, Eqs. (8.47) and (8.48) remain valid, with the condition that the
derivative is calculated at h^. If pim = 0, it is possible to rewrite Eqs. (8.47)
                  e following way, which is very convenient for practical ap-
plications:

                                                                                           (8.51)

                                                                                           (8.52)
                                                   i


                 c»v(,,.«)^i:(t)(||)<                                                      (8.53)

                                                       dgi            9gj
                                =
                                    2—i Sii<                   0~h,         &h,            (8.54)
                                     I
                                                       dht            dhi

                                = y       j   Sij, Ui, v,j,                                (8.55)
                                      i

                                = J2Cov' (Vi,i               Uj).                          (8.56)

u^ is the component of the standard uncertainty due to effect hi. s^, is
equal to the product of signs of the derivatives, which takes into account
whether the uncertainties are positively or negatively correlated.
   To summarize, when systematic effects are not correlated with each
other, the following quantities are needed to evaluate the corrected result,
the combined uncertainties and the correlations:

  • the raw fim and O-R{ ;
  • the best estimates of the corrections Sui, for each systematic effect hi;
                  Bypassing Bayes' theorem for routine applications              181


   • the best estimate of the standard deviation u,, due to the imperfect
     knowledge of the systematic effect;
   • for any pair {fii, fij} the sign of the correlation s^-, due to the effect hi.

      In physics applications it is frequently the case that the derivatives ap­
 pearing in Eqs. (8.50)-(8.54) cannot be calculated directly, as for example
 when hi are parameters of a simulation program, or acceptance cuts. Then
 variations of fii are usually studied by varying a particular hi within a rea­
 sonable interval, holding the other influence quantities at the nominal value.
 6fii, and u^ are calculated from the interval ± A * of variation of the true
 value for a given variation ± A ^ of hi and from the probabilistic meaning
 of the intervals (i.e. from the assumed distribution of the true value). This
 empirical procedure for determining 5/J.J, and Uj, has the advantage that
 it can take into account nonlinear effects, since it directly measures the
 difference fa — Ji^ for a given difference hi — h^t.
      Some simple examples are given in Sec. 8.9, and two typical experimen­
 tal applications will be discussed in more detail in Sec. 8.13. More details
 on the subject, including the approximate treatment of nonlinear effects,
 will be shown in Chapter 12.


 8.7     B I P M and ISO r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s

 In this section we compare the results obtained in the previous section with
 the recommendations [4] of the Bureau International des Poids et Mesures
 (BIPM) and the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) on
  "the expression of experimental uncertainty". [5]
"(1)      The uncertainty in the result of a measurement generally consists of
          several components which may be grouped into two categories accord­
          ing to the way in which their numerical value is estimated:
          A: those which are evaluated by statistical methods;
          B : those which are evaluated by other means.
          There is not always a simple correspondence between the classifica­
          tion into categories A or B and the previously used classification into
          'random' and 'systematic' uncertainties. The term 'systematic uncer­
          tainty' can be misleading and should be avoided.
          The detailed report of the uncertainty should consist of a complete list
          of the components, specifying for each the method used to obtain its
          numerical result. "
       Essentially the first recommendation states t h a t all uncertainties can
 182             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


        be treated probabilistically. T h e distinction between types A and B
        is subtle and can be misleading if one thinks of 'statistical m e t h o d s '
        as synonymous with 'probabilistic methods', as is currently the case in
        Physics. Here 'statistical' has the classical meaning of repeated mea­
        surements. T h e names 'A' and ' B ' do not reveal much fantasy, b u t
        according t o Klaus Weise it was the only agreement to which the ISO
        committee could come [35].
" (2)        The components in category A are characterized by the estimated vari­
            ances si (or the estimated 'standard deviations' Si) and the number of
            degrees of freedom Ui. Where appropriate, the covariances should be
            given."
        T h e estimated variances correspond to o\. of the previous section. T h e
        degrees of freedom are related t o small samples and to the Student t
        distribution. T h e problem of small samples is not discussed in these
        notes, b u t clearly this recommendation is a relic of frequentistic meth­
        ods. 4 W i t h t h e approach followed in this primer there is no need t o
        talk about degrees of freedom, since the Bayesian inference defines t h e
        final probability function f(n) completely.
" (3)       The components in category B should be characterized by quantities
            uj, which may be considered as approximations to the corresponding
            variances, the existence of which is assumed. The quantities uj may be
            treated like variances and the quantities UJ like standard deviations.
            Where appropriate, the covariances should be treated in a similar way."
        Clearly, this recommendation is meaningful only in a Bayesian frame­
        work.
" (4)       The combined uncertainty should be characterized by the numerical
            value obtained by applying the usual method for the combination of
            variances. The combined uncertainty and its components should be
            expressed in the form of 'standard deviations'. "
        This is what we have found in Eqs. (8.47) and (8.48).
" (5)       If, for particular applications, it is necessary to multiply the combined
            uncertainty by a factor to obtain an overall uncertainty, the multiplying
            factor used must always be stated. "
        This last recommendation states once more t h a t the uncertainty is 'by
        default' the standard deviation of the t r u e value distribution. Any
        other quantity calculated t o obtain a credibility interval with a certain
        probability level should be clearly stated.
    4
     For criticisms about the standard treatment of the small-sample problem see
 Ref. [33].
                   Bypassing Bayes' theorem for routine applications                             183


To summarize, these are the basic ingredients of the B I P M / I S O recommen­
dations.

s u b j e c t i v e d e f i n i t i o n of p r o b a b i l i t y : it allows variances to be assigned
      conceptually to any physical quantity which has an uncertain value;
u n c e r t a i n t y as s t a n d a r d d e v i a t i o n

      • it is 'standard';
      • the rule of combination (4.99)-(4.99) applies t o s t a n d a r d deviations
        and not to confidence intervals;

c o m b i n e d s t a n d a r d u n c e r t a i n t y : it is obtained by t h e usual formula of
       'error propagation' and it makes use of variances, covariances and first
       derivatives;
c e n t r a l l i m i t t h e o r e m : it makes, under proper conditions, the true value
       normally distributed if one has several sources of uncertainty.

   Consultation of the Guide [5] is recommended for further explanations
about the justification of the standards, for the description of evaluation
procedures, and for examples. I would just like to end this section with
some examples of the evaluation of type B uncertainties and with some
words of caution concerning the use of approximations and of linearization.



8.8     Evaluation of t y p e B uncertainties

T h e ISO Guide states t h a t

       "For estimate Xi of an input quantity5 Xi that has not been obtained
      from repeated observations, the ... standard uncertainty Ui is evaluated
      by scientific judgment based on all the available information on the pos­
      sible variability of Xi. The pool of information may include

      • previous measurement data;
      • experience with or general knowledge of the behaviour and properties
        of relevant materials and instruments;
      • manufacturer's specifications;
      • data provided in calibration and other certificates;
      • uncertainties assigned to reference data taken from handbooks".

    By 'input quantity' the ISO Guide means any of the contributions hi or ^,Ri which
enter into Eqs. (8.47) and (8.48).
184           Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


8.9    Examples of type B uncertainties

In practice, we need to model our uncertainty on each influence quantity
which acts as systematic effects. Figure 8.1 shows some simple models. Let
us make some examples.

(1) Previous measurements of other particular quantities, performed in
    similar conditions, have provided a repeatability standard deviation
    of 0>:



      This example shows a type B uncertainty originated by random errors.

(2) We have measured n counts, with n large, and evaluate the uncer­
    tainty on the 'theoretical average number of events' to be u = y/n
    (see Sec. 7.4). This is another example of type B uncertainty that
    is caused by random errors. In fact, u = \/n has not been evalu­
    ated as a standard deviation from a sample of data (we might have
    read in the detector display just the number n), but results from
    believing a probabilistic model of detector response. The same is true
    when we infer an efficiency using a binomial model (see Sec. 7.1).
(3) A manufacturer's calibration certificate states that the uncertainty, de­
    fined as k standard deviations, is "±A":

                                              A


(4) A result is reported in a publication as a; ± A, stating that the average
    has been performed on four measurements and the uncertainty is a 95 %
    confidence interval. One has to conclude that the confidence interval
    has been calculated using the Student t:

                                              A
                                       U =
                                             3T8'
(5) A manufacturer's specification states that the error on a quantity
    should not exceed A. With this limited information one has to assume
    a uniform distribution:

                                       2A   A
                                   u = —= = —= .
                                       y/V2 y/l
               Bypassing Bayes' theorem for routine applications              185




Fig. 8.1 Typical models to assess type-B uncertainties: uniform distribution,
symmetric triangular distribution, asymmetric triangular distribution, and Gaus­
sian distribution. The expressions of the most relevant statistical parameters are
reported (S stands for skewness, /C for kurtosis).
186            Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


(6) A physical parameter of a Monte Carlo is believed to lie in the interval
    of ± A around its best value, but not with uniform distribution: the
    degree of belief that the parameter is at center is higher than the degree
    of belief that it is at the edges of the interval. With this information a
    triangular distribution can be reasonably assumed:

                                            A
                                        u = —p .

      Note that the coefficient in front of A changes from the 0.58 of the pre­
      vious example to the 0.41 of this. If the interval ± A were a 3<r interval
      then the coefficient would have been equal to 0.33. These variations —
      to be considered extreme — are smaller than the statistical fluctuations
      of empirical standard deviations estimated from « 10 measurements.
      This shows that one should not be worried that the type B uncertain­
      ties are less accurate than type A, especially if one tries to model the
      distribution of the physical quantity honestly.


8.10     Comments on the use of type B uncertainties

I know by personal experience that physicists, including myself at the very
beginning, are reluctant to evaluate type B uncertainty, especially when
they are not easily obtainable by a model (e.g. the ' ± v ^ ' case encountered
in point (1) of the previous Section) but required much scientific judgment.
I find the situation paradoxical, because this is the only way most of 'sys­
tematic errors' can be — and actually are — evaluated. But, unfortunately
without the guidance of subjective probability these 'errors' are often ar­
bitrary numbers of obscure meaning: they are not 'intervals of certainty'
(who would never state it?); they are not interval expressing some degree
of belief. Then, which rules should be used to combine them? Not those
of probability, if these 'objects' do not belong to the probability theory.
Perhaps those of certainty (assuming such interval really indicate some cer­
tainty), but then "the error bars become too large!"... (and 'prescriptions'
are preferred).

Probability intervals determined by coherence One of the reasons
   of hesitation is the model to choose: should it be a Gaussian or a
   uniform distribution? Coherence suggests to try to think of possible
   bets to determine roughly the interval of 'practical certainty', the 50%
   interval, and so on. In this way we get some ideas of how the probability
                 Bypassing Bayes' theorem for routine        applications           187


   distribution looks like.
Role of central limit theorem At this point, we have to turn our vague
   ideas into numbers. Fortunately, if we have many contributions to the
   uncertainty, as is often the case, the central limit theorem makes the
   result only depending on expected value and standard deviation, and
   not on the details of the distribution. Therefore, the psychological
   resistance to choose a model should become weaker. As a numerical
   example, let us consider the standard deviations of input quantities
   believed to be, with certainty or with high probability, in the interval
   between —1 and + 1 .

                                         Uniform:    a(X)

                          Symmetric triangular: <J{X)

       Asymmetric triangular peaked at 1/2: cr(X)

          Gaussian, 90% probability interval:        a(X)

          Gaussian, 95% probability interval: CF(X)

       We see that, for practical purposes, the differences between the cr's are
       irrelevant. Nevertheless, in order to avoid a bias of the overall uncer­
       tainty one should try to model each component according to the best
       knowledge of the physics case, rather than by choosing systematically
       the model which gives the most conservative uncertainty. 6 Note that in
       the case of asymmetric triangular distribution, the expected value of X
       is neither the center of the interval, nor the peak of the distribution. In
       this case we have E(X) = 1/6 « 0.17. If one uses, incorrectly, the peak
       value, one introduces a bias which is « 80% of a standard deviation.
   6
    In case of doubt between some models, the probability theory teaches that one should
use f{x) = £V fi{x)pi where pi is our confidence in the different models. It follows:

                      E
                          W = Z f . [xii{x)dx =          YJVi{X)pi
                                     J
                                 i                   i

                     E(X2) = Y,Pi Jx2fi(x)dx        = ^E;(X2)Pi
                                 i                       i
188          Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


   As an example, Fig. 4.3 shows the resulting uncertainty on the quantity
   Y = X\ + X2, where the Xi are independent and their uncertainty is
   described by identical asymmetrical triangular distributions. The com­
   bined result is obtained analytically using Eq. (4.95). One can see how
   good the Gaussian approximation already is and how biased a result
   could be, if the best estimate of the sum is performed using mode or
   median, and if the final uncertainty is evaluated with ad hoc rules of
   the kind shown in the introduction.
   Obviously, one has to be careful about the condition of validity of the
   central limit theorem. In the most general case the final distribution
   will not be (multivariate) Gaussian and the combination of uncertainty
   must be done evaluating the integral (4.95) by Monte Carlo methods.
   Nevertheless, the compensations upon which the central limit theorem
   relies make the result highly model independent in this case too. An
   analysis of important frontier physics quantities in which these ideas
   (though in my opinion in a rather conservative way — see Ref. [77])
   are applied throughout, can be found in Ref. [78].
Sensitivity analysis Finally, in case of doubts, a sensitivity analysis is
   recommended, i.e. changing models and model parameters in a reason­
   able way. In the case where there is large sensitivity to a parameter, a
   detailed account should be given.

My frank recommendation is the following. Try to model at best, honestly,
the uncertainties in your field of expertise, use probability rules and you
will get sensible results. If you think you 'know nothing' and you do not
want to be committed, you should not publish any result. Perhaps you
would feel less anxious working in a mathematics department.
    Let us conclude with a practical example based on realistic numbers in
which the methods described here are compared with naive considerations.

Example The absolute energy calibration of an electromagnetic calorime­
   ter module is not known exactly and is estimated to be between the
   nominal one and +10%. The 'statistical' error is known by test beam
   measurements to be 18%/'y/E/GeV. What is the uncertainty on the
   energy measurement of an electron which has apparently released 30
   GeV?
      • There is no type A uncertainty, since only one measurement has
        been performed.
      • The energy has to be corrected for the best estimate of the cali-
                 Bypassing Bayes' theorem for routine applications                   189


         bration constant: + 5 % , with an uncertainty of 10%/i/l2 due to
         sampling (the 'statistical' error):

                                    E = 31.5 ± 1.0 GeV.

       • Then one has to take into account the uncertainty due to absolute
         energy scale calibration:
          — assuming a uniform distribution of the true calibration constant,
           u = 31.5 x O . l / v ^ = 0.9GeV:

                                      E = 31.5 ± 1 . 3 G e V ,
          — assuming, more reasonably, a triangular distribution, it = 31.5 x
           0.05/\/6 = 0.6 GeV,

                                      E = 31.5 ± 1 . 2 G e V ,

       • Interpreting the maximum deviation from the nominal calibration
         as uncertainty (see comment at the end of Sec. 6.9),

                   E = 30.0 ± 1.0 ± 3.0 GeV -> E = 30.0 ± 3.2 GeV;
         As already mentioned earlier in these notes, while reasonable as­
         sumptions (in this case the first two) give consistent results, this is
         not true if one makes inconsistent use of the information just for the
         sake of giving 'safe' uncertainties.


8.11     Caveat concerning the blind use of approximate meth­
         ods

The mathematical apparatus of variances and covariances of Eqs. (8.47)-
(8.48) is often seen as the most complete description of uncertainty and
in most cases used blindly in further uncertainty calculations. It must be
clear, however, that this is just an approximation based on linearization.
If the function which relates the corrected value to the raw value and the
systematic effects is not linear then the linearization may cause trouble. An
interesting case is discussed in Sec. 8.13.
    There is another problem which may arise from the simultaneous use
of Bayesian estimators and approximate methods 7 . Let us introduce the
    This is exactly the presumed paradox reported by the PDG [79] as an argument
against Bayesian statistics (Sec. 29.6.2, p. 175: "// Bayesian estimates are averaged,
they do not converge to the true value, since they have all been forced to be positive").
190            Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


problem with an example.
Example 1: 1000 independent measurements of the efficiency of a detector
   have been performed (or 1000 measurements of branching ratio, if you
   prefer). Each measurement was carried out on a base of 100 events and
   each time 10 favorable events were observed (this is obviously strange
   — though not impossible — but it simplifies the calculations). The
   result of each measurement will be (see Eqs. (7.3)-(7.5)):
                                      10 + 1
                                             = 0.1078,                          (8.57)
                                     100 + 2

                           ■*•> = JiMm=0M1-                                       < 858 >
      Combining the 1000 results using the standard weighted average pro­
      cedure gives

                                 e = 0.1078±0.0010.                             (8.59)

      Alternatively, taking the complete set of results to be equivalent to
      100000 trials with 10000 favorable events, the combined result is

                                 e' = 0.10001 ±0.0009                           (8.60)

      (the same as if one had used Bayes' theorem sequentially to infer /(e)
      from the partial 1000 results). The conclusions are in disagreement and
      the first result is clearly mistaken (the solution will be given after the
      following example).

The same problem arises in the case of inference of the Poisson distribution
parameter A and, in general, whenever /(/u) is not symmetrical around
E(/i).

Example 2: Imagine an experiment running continuously for one year,
   searching for magnetic monopoles and identifying none. The consis­
   tency with zero can be stated either quoting E(A) = 1 and <j\ = 1, or
   a 95 % upper limit A < 3. In terms of rate (number of monopoles per
   day) the result would be either E(r) = 2.7 • 10" 3 , a(r) = 2.7 ■ 10~ 3 , or
   an upper limit r < 8.2 ■ 1 0 - 3 . It is easy to show that, if we take the 365
   results for each of the running days and combine them using the stan­
   dard weighted average, we get r = 1.00 + 0.05 monopoles per day! This
   absurdity is not caused by the Bayesian method, but by the standard
   rules for combining the results (the weighted average formulae (6.9)
                Bypassing Bayes' theorem for routine   applications               191


    and (6.10) are derived from the normal distribution hypothesis). Using
    Bayesian inference would have led to a consistent and reasonable result
    no matter how the 365 days of running had been subdivided for partial
    analysis.

This suggests that in some cases it could be preferable to give the result in
terms of the value of fi which maximizes f(fi) (pm and Am of Sees. 7.1 and
7.4). This way of presenting the results is similar to that suggested by the
maximum likelihood approach, with the difference that for /(/u) one should
take the final probability density function and not simply the likelihood.
Since it is practically impossible to summarize the outcome of an inference
in only two numbers (best value and uncertainty), a description of the
method used to evaluate them should be provided, except when f(/j.) is
approximately normally distributed (fortunately this happens most of the
time).


8.12    Propagation of uncertainty

We have seen how to infer the value of the generic quantity \i in several
cases, using also approximations. Conceptually this is a very simple task
in the Bayesian framework, whereas the frequentistic one requires a lot of
gymnastics, going back and forth from the logical level of true values to
the logical level of estimators. If one accepts that the true values are just
uncertain numbers 8 , then, calling Y a function of other quantities X, each
having a probability density function f{x), the probability density function
of Y f(y) can be calculated with the standard formulae which follow from
the rules probability (see Sec. 4.4).
    In particular, it is very important for practical application the case
in which the linearization approximation holds (Sec. 4.4) and well-known
'error propagation formulae' are recovered. But one has to be very careful
in checking the validity of the approximation, as the following (counter-)
example shows.

Example: The speed of a proton is measured with a time-of-flight system.
   Find the 68, 95 and 99 % probability intervals for the energy, knowing
   that /3 = v/c = 0.9971, and that distance and time have been measured
   8
     To make the formalism lighter, let us call both the uncertain numbers, or 'random
variable', associated with the quantity and the quantity itself by the same name X{
(instead of \xXi )•
192             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical      introduction


      with a 0.2 % accuracy.
      The relation

                                        „            mc2
                                        E=       .

      is strongly nonlinear. The results given by the approximate method
      and the correct one are shown in the table below.


                     Probability       Linearization        Correct result
                          (%)             E (GeV)             E (GeV)
                           68          6.4 < E < 18         8.8 < E < 64
                           95          0.7 < E < 24         7.2 < E < oo
                           99           0. < E < 28         6.6 < E < oo

This argument will be treated in more detail in Chapter 12, where also
practical formulae for second order expansion will be given.


8.13     Covariance matrix of experimental results — more de­
         tails

This section, based on Ref. [80], shows once more practical rules to build
the covariance matrix associated with experimental data with correlated
uncertainty (see also Sees. 6.10 and 8.6), treating explicitly also the case
of normalization uncertainty. Then it will be shown that, in this case, the
covariance matrix evaluated in this way produces biased \2 fits.


8.13.1      Building the covariance           matrix       of experimental          data
In physics applications, it is rarely the case that the covariance between
the best estimates of two physical quantities 9 , each given by the arithmetic
average of direct measurements (xi = Xj = ^ Y^k=i -^t*)> c a n be evaluated
   9
     In this section the symbol X, will indicate the variable associated to the i-th physical
quantity and X^ its fc-th direct measurement; xi the best estimate of its value, obtained
by an average over many direct measurements or indirect measurements, ai the standard
deviation, and yi the value corrected for the calibration constants. The weighted average
of several Xi will be denoted by x.
                Bypassing Bayes' theorem for routine    applications                193


from the sample covariance10 of the two averages:

                              1          X
           Covfe, Xj) =              ^       ^   - XMXik     - *i)     ■       ( 8 - 61 )

More frequent is the well-understood case in which the physical quantities
are obtained as a result of a x 2 minimization, and the terms of the inverse
of the covariance matrix are related to the curvature of x2 at its minimum:




In most cases one determines independent values of physical quantities with
the same detector, and the correlation between them originates from the
detector calibration uncertainties. Frequentistically, the use of Eq. (8.61) in
this case would correspond to having a 'sample of detectors', each of which
is used to perform a measurement of all the physical quantities.
    A way of building the covariance matrix from the direct measurements
is to consider the original measurements and the calibration constants as
a common set of independent and uncorrelated measurements, and then to
calculate corrected values that take into account the calibration constants.
The variance/covariance propagation will automatically provide the full
covariance matrix of the set of results. Let us derive it for two cases that
occur frequently, and then proceed to the general case.

8.13.1.1    Offset uncertainty
Let Xi ± <Ji be the i = 1 , . . . ,n results of independent measurements and
V F x the (diagonal) covariance matrix. Let us assume that they are all
affected by the same calibration constant c, having a standard uncertainty
<TC. The corrected results are then yi = Xi+c. We can assume, for simplicity,
that the most probable value of c is 0, i.e. the detector is well calibrated.
One has to consider the calibration constant as the physical quantity Xn+\,
whose best estimate is xn+\ = 0. A term Vx„ +1>n+1 = o\ must be added to
the covariance matrix.
  10
     The 'n — V at the denominator of Eq. (8.61) is for the same reason as the 'n — V
of the sample standard deviation. Although I do not agree with the rationale behind
it, this formula can be considered a kind of standard and, anyhow, replacing 'n — 1' by
'n' has no effect in normal applications. As already said, I will not discuss the small-
sample problem; anyone is interested in my worries concerning default formulae for small
samples, as well as Student t distribution may have a look at Ref. [33].
194           Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical            introduction


   The covariance matrix of the corrected results is given by the transfor­
mation

                                   Vy = MV^MJ                                           (8.63)

where My- =       J^   . The elements of V y are given by

                                                   dYt
                        v          -X^dYk                       VXii ■                  (8.64)
                                                   dXi
                                   13


In this case we get

                        a*(Yi) = *t+ai,                                                 (8.65)
                   Cov(Yi,Yj)      = al              (i * 3),                           (8.66)

                             Pij
                                                                                        (8.67)
                                                         1

                                        \/i+(s)!\A+W                                    (8.68)


reobtaining the results of Sec. 6.10. The total uncertainty on the single
measurement is given by the combination in quadrature of the individual
and the common standard uncertainties, and all the covariances are equal
to a2. To verify, in a simple case, that the result is reasonable, let us
consider only two independent quantities X\ and X2, and a calibration
constant X3 = c, having an expected value equal to zero. From these
we can calculate the correlated quantities Yy and Y2 and finally their sum
(5 = Z\) and difference (D = Z 2 ). The results are

                                   e2+cr2
                       Vv                                                               (8.69)
                                                o\+°l


                                   a2+a2+4a2
                       Vz =                                                             (8.70)
                                                         a2 + a2

It follows that

                            a2(S)=a2            + a2 +       (2ac)2,                    (8.71)
                             2          2   2
                            a (D)=a +a ,                                                (8.72)
                  Bypassing Bayes' theorem for routine           applications       195


as intuitively expected.

8.13.1.2   Normalization            uncertainty
Let us consider now the case where the calibration constant is the scale
factor / , known with a standard uncertainty Of. Also in this case, for sim­
plicity and without losing generality, let us suppose that the most probable
value of / is 1. Then Xn+i = / , i.e. x n + i = 1, and Vjcn+1>n+1 = cPj. Then

                       a (Yi) — u2t -T
                                    ,   2 2
                                       uf~ t ,                                   (8.73)
                               af + crf xf
                  Cov(Yi,Yj)        =   ajxiXj               (i ± J)             (8.74)

                             Pij
                                         X
                                          ? + Jf         X2j +                   (8.75)

                            \Pij\   =
                                         1+
                                                   fe) V1+fe)                    (8.76)

To verify the results let us consider two independent measurements X\ and
X2; let us calculate the correlated quantities Y± and Y2, and finally their
product (P = Z\) and their ratio (R = Z2):

                        'erf +aj x\           aj x1 x2
             Vy                                                                  (8.77)
                             aj Xi x2        a\     +ajx2,


                        1
                            o\xl+olx\+\o)x\x\                           a\-a\^
             Vz =                                                                (8.78)
                                                                        a
                       V                      °l^                % + l% )
It follows that

                      <x2(P) =a{x\           +o-i,x{ + (2o-fXlx2y           ,    (8.79)

                      o>{R) =           %+*2      ~4 •                           (8.80)

Just as an unknown common offset error cancels in differences and is en­
hanced in sums, an unknown normalization error has a similar effect on
the ratio and the product. It is also interesting to calculate the standard
196          Bayesian    reasoning in data analysis: A critical          introduction


uncertainty of a difference in the case of a normalization error:


                        a2(D) =af + a^+aj              (xi - x2)                        (8.81)


The contribution from an unknown normalization error vanishes if the two
values are equal.


8.13.1.3   General case
Let us assume that there are n independently measured values Xi and m
calibration constants Cj with their covariance matrix V c . The latter can also
be theoretical parameters influencing the data, and moreover they may be
correlated, as usually happens if, for example, they are parameters of a
calibration fit. We can then include the Cj in the vector that contains the
measurements and V c in the covariance matrix V ^ :



                                               la\       0 ••• 0             \
                                                   0 a\ ■ ■ • 0
                        xn
             x =                        Vx =                             0              (8.82)
                                                   0     0 • • • a2n

                   \cmJ                        \              ° vj
The corrected quantities are obtained from the most general function


                Yi =         Yi(Xi,c)                (i = l , 2 , . . . , n ) ,         (8.83)


and the covariance matrix Vy from the covariance propagation Vy =
MVXMT.
    As a frequently encountered example, we can think of several normal­
ization constants, each affecting a subsample of the data — as is the case
where each of several detectors measures a set of physical quantities. Let
us consider just three quantities (Xi) and three uncorrelated normalization
standard uncertainties (c/j), the first common to X\ and X2, the second
to X2 and X3 and the third to all three. We get the following covariance
                Bypassing Bayes' theorem for routine applications                      197


matrix:


  <o\ + (a2fl + a2h) x\         (a\   + a%) xx x2                   a\ xx x3       >


       H + ah) x* X2 a 2 + ( 4 + <*% + <?%) 4 (<4 + <r2h) *2 x3                              .

  \        °hx± x*              H + a\) x2 *3             °\ + fa + o\) x\)

8.14      Use and misuse of the covariance matrix to fit corre­
          lated data

We have already seen in Sec. 8.11 paradoxical results obtained using un­
critically approximate formulae. Some of those affects are well known. Less
known is a curious effect which might arise in minimum x 2 fits, which we
have seen in Sec. 8.1 that can be considered for many practical purposes
good approximations of Bayesian analysis.


8.14.1     Best estimate     of the true value from two               correlated
           values
Once the covariance matrix is built one uses it in a x2 fit to get the param­
eters of a function. The quantity to be minimized is \2, defined as


                                X2 = A T V " 1 A ,                             (8.84)


where A is the vector of the differences between the experimental and the
theoretical values. Let us consider the simple case in which two results
of the same physical quantity are available, and the individual and the
common standard uncertainty are known. The best estimate of the true
value of the physical quantity is then obtained by fitting the constant Y = k
through the data points. In this simple case the \ 2 minimization can be
performed easily. We will consider the two cases of offset and normalization
uncertainty. As before, we assume that the detector is well calibrated, i.e.
the most probable value of the calibration constant is, respectively for the
two cases, 0 and 1, and hence yi = x\.
198          Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical            introduction


8.14.2    Offset    uncertainty
Let x\ ± a\ and x2 ± o2 be the two measured values, and ac the common
standard uncertainty:
                 _1_
            X2 = fr [(*i - kf {al + a\) + (x2 - kf ( ^ + a\)
                 ~D
                      - 2 (xi - k) (x2 - k) <rc2] ,                                    (8.85)
where D = a\ a\ + (CT^ +CT§) O-2. is the determinant of the covariance matrix.
   Minimizing \2 a n d using the second derivative calculated at the mini­
mum we obtain the best value of k and its standard deviation:
                                    A + x21 - 2
                               S ^ t T          (=*).                                  (^6)

                        °2Ck) = 4^k                  + *2c-                                    (8-87)
The most probable value of the physical quantity is exactly that which
one obtains from the average x weighted with the inverse of the individual
variances. Its overall uncertainty is the quadratic sum of the standard
deviation of the weighted average and the common one. The result coincides
with the simple expectation.

8.14.3    Normalization             uncertainty
Let x\ ± <7i and x2 ± a2 be the two measured values, and 07 the common
standard uncertainty on the scale:
               1
         X2 = ^ [(*i " kf (a* + x\ a)) + (x2 - kf (af + x\ a))
              D
                  - 2 ■ (xi - k) ■ (x2 - k) ■ X\ ■ x2 ■ aj] ,

where D = a\ a\ + (x\ a2 +x2crf)a'j              . We obtain in this case the following
result:

                              k=          Y2+X2a\2             2,                      (8.89)
                                                                                       v         ;
                                   ol+at        + {xx -x2fay

                    a   ik)                                                            (8 90)
                              = al    +    a>   +   (Xl-x2fa}       '                      -

With respect to the previous case, k has a new term (xi — x2f er? in the
denominator. As long as this is negligible with respect to the individual
               Bypassing Bayes' theorem for routine    applications         199


variances we still get the weighted average x, otherwise a smaller value is
obtained. Calling r the ratio between k and x, we obtain


                          *•= = =         (ai-ga)a    2-                (8-91)

Written in this way, one can see that the deviation from the simple average
value depends on the compatibility of the two values and on the normaliza­
tion uncertainty. This can be understood in the following way: as soon as
the two values are in some disagreement, the fit starts to vary the normaliza­
tion factor (in a hidden way) and to squeeze the scale by an amount allowed
by Of, in order to minimize the x 2 ■ The reason the fit prefers normalization
factors smaller than 1 under these conditions lies in the standard formalism
of the covariance propagation, where only first derivatives are considered.
This implies that the individual standard deviations are not rescaled by
lowering the normalization factor, but the points get closer.

E x a m p l e 1. Consider the results of two measurements, 8.0 • (1 ± 2 %) and
     8.5 • (1 ± 2 %), having a 10 % common normalization error. Assuming
     that the two measurements refer to the same physical quantity, the
     best estimate of its true value can be obtained by fitting the points to
     a constant. Minimizing x 2 with V estimated empirically by the data,
     as explained in the previous section, one obtains a value of 7.87 ± 0.81,
     which is surprising to say the least, since the most probable result is
     outside the interval determined by the two measured values.
E x a m p l e 2. A real life case of this strange effect which occurred during
     the global analysis of the 'R ratio' in e + e~ annihilation performed by
     the CELLO Collaboration [81], is shown in Fig. 8.2. The data points
     represent the averages in energy bins of the results of the PETRA and
     PEP experiments. They are all correlated and the bars show the total
     uncertainty (see Ref. [82] for details). In particular, at the intermediate
     stage of the analysis shown in the figure, an overall 1 % systematic error
     due to theoretical uncertainties was included in the covariance matrix.
     The R values above 36 GeV show the first hint of the rise of the e + e~
     cross-section due to the Z° pole. At that time it was very interesting
     to prove that the observation was not just a statistical fluctuation. In
     order to test this, the R measurements were fitted with a theoretical
     function having no Z° contributions, using only data below a certain
     energy. It was expected that a fast increase of x 2 per number of degrees
     of freedom v would be observed above 36 GeV, indicating that a the-
200              Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical                                                                   introduction




                       i       i   i   i    i        i   i        i    i        i         i   i       *   i      i             '       i

             R -                                                                                                                                        "
                  _                                                                                                                        i   1        _
            L2
                                                             f                                            T
                                                                                                                                                        -
                           i
                                                                                                                     i >           1                    _
            4.0 ~ «_^ _                                                    (t                             11-
                                                                                                                                                       _
                                                             I I
                               ^ ~*~-— . «                                  • <>                  T                                                     ~
                                                                                                                                                       ~
            3.8
                                                                                •*■

                                                                                                                                                       -


                      1        1   I   I   1     I       <    I       r         1     I       I       I   I      1         I        I              1


                                           20                              30                                   0)                                     50
                                                                                                                       i/S(GeV)


Fig. 8.2 R measurements from P E T R A and P E P experiments with the best fits of
Q E D + Q C D to all the data (full line) and only below 36 GeV (dashed line). All data
points are correlated (see text).


      oretical prediction without Z° would be inadequate for describing the
      high-energy data. The surprising result was a 'repulsion' (see Fig. 8.2)
      between the experimental data and the fit: Including the high-energy
      points with larger R a lower curve was obtained, while x2' jv remained
      almost constant.

To see the source of this effect more explicitly let us consider an alterna­
tive way often used to take the normalization uncertainty into account. A
scale factor / , by which all data points are multiplied, is introduced to the
expression of the \ 2 '■
                                   (fXl         - kf                  (fx2-kf                                   (/ - l) 2
                      x\                                                                                                                                    (8.92)
                                       (M)                                  U°2f                                       'i
Let us also consider the same expression when the individual standard
deviations are not rescaled:
                               _ (M-fc)2                              (/x2-fc)2                                 (/-l)2
                                                                                                                                                            (8.93)
                   Bypassing Bayes' theorem for routine        applications          201


The use of x\ always gives the result k = x, because the term (/ - l ) 2 / 0 / is
harmless 11 as far as the value of the minimum \2 and the determination on
A; are concerned. Its only influence is on cr(k), which turns out to be equal
to quadratic combination of the weighted average standard deviation with
Of x, the normalization uncertainty on the average. This result corresponds
to the usual one when the normalization factor in the definition of x2 is not
included, and the overall uncertainty is added at the end.
    Instead, the use of \ \ is equivalent to the covariance matrix: The same
values of the minimum %2, of k and of a(k) are obtained, and / at the min­
imum turns out to be exactly the r ratio defined above. This demonstrates
that the effect happens when the data values are rescaled independently of
their standard uncertainties. The effect can become huge if the data show
mutual disagreement. The equality of the results obtained with x% w ^ n
those obtained with the covariance matrix allows us to study, in a simpler
way, the behavior of r (= / ) when an arbitrary number of data points are
analyzed. The fitted value of the normalization factor is




If the values of Xi are consistent with a common true value it can be shown
that the expected value of / is


                                < / > =
                                          l   +       (n1-l).r                         ^

Hence, there is a bias on the result when for a non-vanishing 07 a large
number of data points are fitted. In particular, the fit on average produces
a bias larger than the normalization uncertainty itself if 07 > l/(n — 1).
One can also see that c2(fc) and the minimum of \2 obtained with the
covariance matrix or with XB a r e smaller by the same factor r than those
obtained with x\-

  11 This   can be seen by rewriting Eq. (8.92) as


                          (x!-fc//)2   , (*2-fc//)2        ,   (/-I)
                                                  T2             a2
                                                  r
                                                      2          "j

For any / , the first two terms determine the value of k, and the third one binds / to 1.
202          Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


8.14.4    Peelle's   Pertinent     Puzzle
To summarize, when there is an overall uncertainty due to an unknown sys­
tematic error and the covariance matrix is used to define x 2 , the behavior of
the fit depends on whether the uncertainty is on the offset or on the scale.
In the first case the best estimates of the function parameters are exactly
those obtained without overall uncertainty, and only the parameters' stan­
dard deviations are affected. In the case of unknown normalization errors,
biased results can be obtained. The size of the bias depends on the fitted
function, on the magnitude of the overall uncertainty and on the number
of data points.
    It has also been shown that this bias comes from the linearization per­
formed in the usual covariance propagation. This means that, even though
the use of the covariance matrix can be very useful in analyzing the data
in a compact way using available computer algorithms, care is required if
there is one large normalization uncertainty which affects all the data.
    The effect discussed above has also been observed independently by
R.W. Peelle and reported the year after the analysis of the CELLO data [81].
The problem has been extensively discussed among the community of nu­
clear physicists, where it is currently known as "Peelle's Pertinent Puz­
zle" [83]. Cases in Physics in which this effect has been found to have
biased the result are discussed in Refs. [84,85]. A recent report of a similar
 "pathological best fit" can be found in Ref. [86].
                               Chapter 9

                   Bayesian unfolding



                           "Now we see but a poor reflection as in a mirror... "
                                                      "Now I know in part... "
                                                                  (1 Cor 13,12)




9.1   Problem and typical solutions

In any experiment the distribution of the measured observables differs from
that of the corresponding true physical quantities due to physics and detec­
tor effects. For example, one may be interested in measuring the variables
x and Q2 in deep-inelastic scattering events. In such a case one is able
to build statistical estimators which in principle have a physical meaning
similar to the true quantities, but which have a non-vanishing variance and
are also distorted due to QED and QCD radiative corrections, parton frag­
mentation, particle decay and limited detector performances. The aim of
the experimentalist is to unfold the observed distribution from all these dis­
tortions so as to extract the true distribution (see also Refs. [87,88]). This
requires a satisfactory knowledge of the overall effect of the distortions on
the true physical quantity.
    When dealing with only one physical variable the usual method for
handling this problem is the so-called bin-to-bin correction: one evaluates
a generalized efficiency (it may even be larger than unity) by calculating
the ratio between the number of events falling in a certain bin of the re­
constructed variable and the number of events in the same bin of the true
variable with a Monte Carlo simulation. This efficiency is then used to
estimate the number of true events from the number of events observed in
that bin. Clearly this method requires the same subdivision in bins of the

                                     203
204          Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


true and the experimental variable and hence it cannot take into account
large migrations of events from one bin to the others. Moreover it neglects
the unavoidable correlations between adjacent bins. This approximation
is valid only if the amount of migration is negligible and if the standard
deviation of the smearing is smaller than the bin size.
    An attempt to solve the problem of migrations is sometimes made by
building a matrix which connects the number of events generated in one
bin to the number of events observed in the other bins. This matrix is
then inverted and applied to the measured distribution. This immediately
produces inversion problems if the matrix is singular. On the other hand,
there is no reason from a probabilistic point of view why the inverse matrix
should exist. This can easily be seen by taking the example of two bins
of the true quantity both of which have the same probability of being ob­
served in each of the bins of the measured quantity. It follows that treating
probability distributions as vectors in space is not correct, even in princi­
ple. Moreover the method is not able to handle large statistical fluctuations
even if the matrix can be inverted (if we have, for example, a very large
number of events with which to estimate its elements and we choose the
binning in such a way as to make the matrix not singular). The easiest
way to see this is to think of the unavoidable negative terms of the inverse
of the matrix which in some extreme cases may yield negative numbers of
unfolded events. Quite apart from these theoretical reservations, the actual
experience of those who have used this method is rather discouraging, the
results being highly unstable.



9.2   Bayes' theorem stated in terms of causes and effects

Let us state Bayes' theorem in terms of several independent causes (d, i =
1,2,..., nc) which can produce one effect (E). For example, if we consider
deep-inelastic scattering events, the effect E can be the observation of an
event in a cell of the measured quantities {AQ^neas, Axmeas}.     The causes
Ci are then all the possible cells of the true values {AQjrue, AxtrUe}i- Let
us assume we know the initial probability of the causes P(Ci) and the con­
ditional probability that the i-th cause will produce the effect P{E\C{).
The Bayes formula is then

                                       p E
                     P(C\E)~           ( \C*)P(C<)                            (9l)
                                  Bayesian     unfolding                                 205


P(Ci I E) depends on the initial probability of the causes. If one has no
better prejudice concerning P(Ci) the process of inference can be started
from a uniform distribution.
    The final distribution depends also on P(E\d).       These probabilities
must be calculated or estimated with Monte Carlo methods. One has to
keep in mind that, in contrast to P(d), these probabilities are not updated
by the observations. So if there are ambiguities concerning the choice of
P(E | d) one has to try them all in order to evaluate their systematic effects
on the results.


9.3    Unfolding an experimental distribution

If one observes n(E) events with effect E, the expected number of events
assignable to each of the causes is

                              n{Ci) = n(E) P(d             | E).                        (9.2)

As the outcome of a measurement one has several possible effects Ej (j =
1,2,..., TIE) for a given cause d. For each of them the Bayes formula (9.1)
holds, and P{Ci | Ej) can be evaluated. Let us write Eq. (9.1) again in the
case of TIE possible effects1, indicating the initial probability of the causes
withP 0 (Ci):

                       Pir    i EM -         -P(£j \Cj)P0{Cj)                               ,


One should note the following.

  • Z)r=i -P°(Ci) = 1; a s usual. Note that if the probability of a cause is
    initially set to zero it can never change, i.e. if a cause does not exist it
    cannot be invented.
  • J27=i P{Ci I Ej) = 1. This normalization condition, mathematically
    trivial since it comes directly from Eq. (9.3), indicates that each effect
    must come from one or more of the causes under examination. This
    means that if the observables also contain a non-negligible amount of
    background, this needs to be included among the causes.
    ' T h e broadening of the distribution due to the smearing suggests a choice of n g larger
than nc- It is worth mentioning that there is no need to reject events where a measured
quantity has a value outside the range allowed for the physical quantity. For example,
in the case of deep-inelastic scattering events, cells with xmeas > 1 or Q ^ j e a s < 0 give
information about the true distribution too.
206            Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical              introduction


  • 0 < Ci = Y^j=i P(Ej | Ci) < 1. There is no need for each cause to
    produce at least one of the effects, e* gives the efficiency of finding the
    cause Ci in any of the possible effects.
   After N0bs experimental observations one obtains a distribution of fre­
quencies n(E) = {n(Ei),n(E2),     ... ,n(EnE)}.  The expected number of
events to be assigned to each of the causes (taking into account only the
observed events) can be calculated by applying Eq. (9.2) to each effect:
                                           HE

                         n(Ci)Ls        = Y/n(Ej)P(Ci\Ej).                                 (9.4)


When inefficiency2 is also brought into the picture, the best estimate of the
true number of events becomes

                             i    nE


                            £i
                                 3= 1

From these unfolded events we can estimate the true total number of events,
the final probabilities of the causes and the overall efficiency:
                                                          nc
                                                Ntrue =          Y2n(Ci),
                                                          j=l

                       P(Ci) = P(Ci\n(E))             =        ^ - ,

                                                    ? =        Nobs
                                                          ly
                                                            true

If the initial distribution P0(C) is not consistent with the data, it will not
agree with the final distribution P(C). The closer the initial distribution
is to the true distribution, the better the agreement is. For simulated data
one can easily verify that the distribution P(C) lies between P0(C) and
the true one. This suggests proceeding iteratively. Figure 9.1 shows an
example of a bidimensional distribution unfolding.
    More details about iteration strategy, evaluation of uncertainty, etc.
can be found in Ref. [89]. I would just like to comment on an obvious
criticism that may be made: uthe iterative procedure is against the Bayesian
spirit, since the same data are used many times for the same inference". In
principle the objection is valid, but in practice this technique is a "trick"
   2
    If tj = 0 then n{Ci) will be set to zero, since the experiment is not sensitive to the
cause Ci.
                                       Bayesian   unfolding                                   207




              IMoldL dblribuCon - rfcn 3                      Unfolded dolribution - *tcp 4



Fig. 9.1 Example of a two-dimensional unfolding: true distribution (a), smeared distri­
bution (b) and results after the first four steps [(c) to (f)].



to give to the experimental data a weight (an importance) larger than
that of the priors. A more rigorous procedure which took into account
uncertainties and correlations of the initial distribution would have been
much more complicated. An attempt of this kind can be found in Ref. [90].
Examples of unfolding procedures performed with non-Bayesian methods
208          Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


are described in Refs. [87,88,15].
    What is usually known in (especially particle) physics as unfolding be­
longs, more in general, to the class of problems elsewhere known as image
reconstruction, or image restoration. When we think of images, we think
immediately of millions of pixels. Thus, the very general procedure dis­
cussed here becomes infeasible (image working with a most general 107 x 107
smearing matrixl). Simplifications and modelizations are then mandatory,
for example assuming that the smearing only affects close cells (pixels), tak­
ing a Gaussian for the smearing function, assuming a uniform noise (or at
most described by some simple function), and so on. The subject becomes
complicated and goes beyond the purpose of this text and we refer to more
specialized literature. Within the Bayesian framework, an extra ingredient
which is often used is Maximum Entropy. Therefore, a starting points to
search for material on the subject are Maximum Entropy books and on line
resources, like Refs. [91,92,93]. A nice introduction to the subject is given
by Ken Hanson [94].
             Part 3


Further comments, examples and
          applications
This page is intentionally left blank
                                         Chapter 10

       Miscellanea on general issues in
          probability and inference

                                                         "You see, a question has arisen,
                                          about which we cannot come to an agreement,
                                        probably because we have read too many books"
                                                                      (Brecht's Galileo)


10.1    U n i f y i n g r o l e of s u b j e c t i v e a p p r o a c h

I would like t o give some examples t o clarify what I mean by 'linguistic
schizophrenia' (see Sec. 3.2). Let us consider the following:

(1) probability of a ' 6 ' when tossing a die;
(2) probability t h a t the 100 001st event will be accepted in the acceptance
    cuts of the analysis of simulated events, if I know t h a t 91 245 out of
    100 000 generated events 1 have already been accepted;
(3) probability t h a t a real event will be accepted in the analysis, given
    the knowledge of point 2, and assuming t h a t exactly the same analysis
    program is used, and t h a t the Monte Carlo describes best the physics
    and the detector;
(4) probability t h a t an observed track is ir+, if I have learned from the
    Monte Carlo t h a t . . . ;
(5) probability t h a t the Higgs mass is greater t h a n 400 GeV;
(6) probability t h a t the 1000th decimal digit of it is 5;
(7) probability of rain tomorrow;
(8) probability t h a t the US dollar will be exchanged at > 2 DM before the
    end of 1999 (statement made in spring 1998).
    Please note that 'event' is also used here according to HEP jargon (this is quite a
case of homonymy to which one has to pay attention, but it has nothing to do with the
linguistic schizophrenia I am talking about).

                                                  211
212             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical     introduction


Let us analyze in detail the statements.

  • The evaluation of point 1 is based on considerations of physical symme­
    try, using the combinatorial evaluation rule. The first remark is that a
    convinced frequentist should abstain from assessing such a probability
    until he has collected statistical data on that die. Otherwise he is im­
    plicitly assuming that the frequency-based definition is not a definition,
    but one of the possible evaluation rules (and then the concept can only
    be that related to the degree of belief...).
    For those who, instead, believe that probability is only related to sym­
    metry the answer appears to be absolutely objective: 1/6. But it is
    clear that one is in fact giving a very precise and objective answer to
    something that is not real ('the idealized die'). Instead, we should only
    talk about reality. This example should help to clarify the de Finetti
    sentence quoted in Sec. 2.2 ( "The classical view ... ", in particular,
     "The original sentence becomes meaningful if reversed... ").
  • Point 2 leads to a consistent answer within the frequentistic approach,
    which is numerically equal to the subjective one [see, for example,
    Eqs. (7.3) and (7.10)], whilst it has no solution in a combinatorial
    definition.
  • Points 3 and 4 are different from point 2. The frequentistic definition
    is not applicable. The translation from simulated events to real events
    is based on beliefs, which may be as firmly based as you like, but they
    remain beliefs. So, although this operation is routinely carried out by
    every experimentalist, it is meaningful only if the probability is meant
    as a degree of belief and not a limit of relative frequency.
  • Points 3-7 are only meaningful if probability is interpreted as a degree
    of belief.2

The unifying role of subjective probability should be clear from these ex­
amples. All those who find statements 1-7 meaningful, are implicitly using
subjective probability. If not, there is nothing wrong with them, on con­
dition that they make probabilistic statements only in those cases where
their definition of probability is applicable (essentially never in real life
and in research). If, however, they still insist on speaking about probabil­
ity outside the condition of validity of their definition, refusing the point
of view of subjective probability, they fall into the self-declared linguistic
    2
      In fact, one could use the combinatorial evaluation in point 6 as well, because of the
discussed cultural reasons, but not everybody is willing to speak about the probability
of something which has a very precise value, although unknown.
             Miscellanea on general issues in probability and inference               213


schizophrenia of which I am talking, and they generate confusion.3
    Another very important point is the crucial role of coherence (see
Sec. 3.2), which allows the exchange of the value of the probability between
rational individuals: if someone tells me that he judges the probability of
a given event to be 68%, then I imagine that he is as confident about it as
he would be about extracting a white ball from a box which contains 100
balls, 68 of which are white. This event could be related, for example, to
the result of a measurement:

                                   li = fi0±    o{n),

assuming a Gaussian model. If an experimentalist feels ready to place a 2:1
bet 4 in favor of the statement, but not a 1:2 bet against it, it means that his
assessment of probability is not coherent. In other words, he is cheating,
for he knows that his result will be interpreted differently from what he
really believes (he has consciously overestimated the 'error bar', because he
is afraid of being contradicted). If you want to know whether a result is
coherent, take an interval given by 70% of the quoted uncertainty and ask
the experimentalist if he is ready to place a 1:1 bet in either direction.


10.2    Prequentists and combinatorial evaluation of probabil­
        ity

In the previous section it was said that frequentists should abstain from
assessing probabilities if a long-run experiment has not been carried out.
But frequentists do, using a sophisticated reasoning, of which perhaps not
everyone is aware. I think that the best way to illustrate this reasoning is
with an example of an authoritative exponent, Polya[95], who adheres to
von Mises' views [54].

     "A bag contains p balls of various colors among which there are exactly
    f white balls. We use this simple apparatus to produce a random mass
    phenomenon. We draw a ball, we look at its color and we write W if the
    ball is white, but we write D if it is of a different color. We put back
    the ball just drawn into the bag, we shuffle the balls in the bag, then
    we draw again one and note the color of this second ball, W or D. In
    3
      See for example Refs. [79] and [73], where it is admitted that the Bayesian approach
is good for decision problems, although they stick to the frequentistic approach.
    4
      This corresponds to a probability of 2/3 m 68%.
214             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical introduction


      proceeding so, we obtain a random sequence        (...):

                    WDDDWDDWWDDDWWD.

      What is the long range relative frequency of the white balls?
      Let us assume that the balls are homogeneous and exactly spherical,
      made of the same material and having the same radius. Their surfaces
      are equally smooth, and their different coloration influences only negligi­
      bly their mechanical behavior, if it has any influence at all. The person
      who draws the balls is blindfolded or prevented in some other manner
      from seeing the balls. The position of the balls in the bag varies from
      one drawing to the other, is unpredictable, beyond our control. Yet the
      permanent circumstances are well under control: the balls are all the
      same shape, size, and weight; they are indistinguishable by the person
      who draws them.
      Under such circumstances we see no reason why one ball should be pre­
      ferred to another and we naturally expect that, in the long run, each
      ball will be drawn approximately equally often. Let us say that we have
      the patience to make 10000 drawings. Then we should expect that each
      of the p balls will appear about

                                     10 000 A.
                                           times.
                                      P
      There are f white balls. Therefore, in 10000 drawings, we expect to get
      white
                              / ™ ~ = 1 0 0 0 0 * times;
                                  P              P
      this is the expected frequency of the white balls. To obtain the relative
      frequency, we have to divide by the number of observations, or drawings,
      that is, 10 000. And so we are led to the statement: the long range
      relative frequency, or probability, of the white balls is f/p.
      The letters f and p are chosen to conform to the traditional mode of
      expression. As we have to draw one of the p balls, we have to choose one
      ofp possible cases. We have good reasons (equal condition of the p balls)
      not to prefer any of these p possible cases to any other. If we wish that
      a white ball should be drawn (for example, if we are betting on white),
      the f white balls appear to us as favorable cases. Hence we can describe
      the probability f/p as the ratio of the number of favorable cases to the
      number of possible cases."

T h e approach sketched in the above example is based on the refusal of call­
ing probability (the intuitive concept of it) by its name. T h e term 'prob­
ability' is used instead for 'long-range relative frequency'. Nevertheless,
the value of probability is not evaluated from the information about past
            Miscellanea on general issues in probability and   inference        215


frequency, but from the hypothetical long-range relative frequency, based
on: a) plausible (and subjective!) reasoning on equiprobability (although
not stated with this term) of the possible outcomes; b) the expectation
(= belief) that the relative frequency will be equal to the fraction of white
balls in the bag. 5 The overall effect is to confuse the matter, without any
philosophical or practical advantages (compare the twisted reasoning of the
above example with Hume's lucid exposure of the concept of probability and
its evaluation by symmetry arguments, reported in Sec. 2.2).


10.3    Interpretation of conditional probability

As repeated throughout these notes, and illustrated with many examples,
probability is always conditioned probability. Absolute probability makes
no sense. Nevertheless, there is still something in the 'primer' which can
be misleading and that needs to be clarified, namely the so-called 'formula
of conditional probability' (Sec. 3.5.2):

                  P(E\H)=P{^)                       (P(H)^O).                (10.1)

What does it mean? Textbooks present it as a definition (a kind of 4th
axiom), although very often, a few lines later in the same book, the formula
P(E n H) = P(E | H) ■ P(H) is presented as a theorem (!).
    In the subjective approach, one is allowed to talk about P(E \ H) inde­
pendently of P{E n H) and P{H). In fact, P(E | H) is just the assessment
of the probability of E, under the condition that H is true. Then it cannot
depend on the probability of H. It is easy to show with an example that
this point of view is rather natural, whilst that of considering Eq. (10.1) as
a definition is artificial. Let us take

  • H = the mass of the Higgs particle is 250 GeV;
  • E — the Higgs decay products which detected in a LHC detector (the
    Large Hadron Collider is the proton-proton collider under construction
    at CERN laboratory in Geneva);
  • the evaluation of P(E \ H) is a standard PhD student task. He chooses
    ran = 250 GeV in the Monte Carlo and counts how many events pass
    the cuts (for the interpretation of this operation, see the previous sec­
    tion). No one would think that P(E \ H) must be evaluated only from
  5
    Sometimes this expectation is justified advocating the law of large numbers, ex­
pressed by the Bernoulli theorem. This is unacceptable, as discussed in Sec. 7.3.
216           Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


      P(Er\H)   and P{H), as the definition (10.1) would imply. Moreover,
      the procedure is legitimate even if we knew with certainty that the
      Higgs mass was below 200 GeV and, therefore, P(H) = 0.
    In the subjective approach, Eq. (10.1) is a true theorem required by
coherence. It means that although one can speak of each of the three prob­
abilities independently of the others, once two of them have been elicited,
the third is constrained. It is interesting to demonstrate the theorem to
show that it has nothing to do with the kind of heuristic derivation of
Sec. 3.5.2:
 • Let us imagine a coherent bet on the conditional event E | H to win
   a unitary amount of money (B = 1, as the scale factor is inessential).
   Remembering the meaning of conditional probability in terms of bets
   (see Sec. 3.5.2), this means that
      - we pay (with certainty) A = P(E \ H);
      - we win 1 if E and H are both verified (with probability P(E n H));
      - we get our money back (i.e. A) if H does not happen (with proba­
        bility P(H)).
 • The expected value of the 'gain' G is given by the probability of each
   event multiplied by the gain associated with each event:

           E(G) = 1 • (~P(E | H)) + P(E n H) ■ 1 + P{H) ■ P(E \ H),

      where the first factors of the products on the right-hand side of the
      formula stand for probability, the second for the amount of money. It
      follows that

            E(G) = -P(E      | H) + P(E r\H) + (l-        P{H)) ■ P{E \ H)
                  = P(EnH)-P(E\H)-P(H).                                        (10.2)

 • Coherence requires the rational better to be indifferent to the direction
   of the bet, i.e. E(G) = 0. Applying this condition to Eq. (10.2) we
   obtain Eq. (10.1).


10.4    Are the beliefs in contradiction to the perceived ob­
        jectivity of physics?

This is one of the most important points to be clarified since it is felt
by many to be the biggest obstacle, preventing them from understanding
              Miscellanea on general issues in probability and inference                  217


the Bayesian approach: is there a place for beliefs in science? The usual
criticism is that science must be objective and, hence, that there should
be no room for subjectivity. A colleague once told me: "I do not believe
something. I assess it. This is not a matter for religion!"
    As I understand it, there are two possible ways to surmount the obstacle.
The first is to try to give a more noble status of objectivity to the Bayesian
approach, for example by formulating objective priors. In my opinion the
main result of this attempt is to spoil the original nature of the theory, by
adding dogmatic ingredients [33]. The second way consists, more simply,
in recognizing that beliefs are a natural part of doing science.6 Admitting
that they exist does not spoil the perceived objectivity of well-established
science. In other words, one needs only to look closely at how frontier
science makes progress, instead of seeking refuge in an idealized concept of
objectivity.7
    Clearly this discussion would require another book, and not just some
side remarks, but I am confident that the reader for whom this report
is intended, and who is supposed to have working experience in frontier
research, is already prepared for what I am going to say. I find it hard
to discuss these matters with people who presume to teach us about the
way physics, and science in general, proceeds, without having the slightest
direct experience of what they are talking about.
    First of all, I would like to invite you to pay attention to the expressions
we use in private and public discussions, and in written matter too. Here
are some examples:

  •  "I believe that . . . " ;
  •  "We have to get experience with . . . " ;
  •  "I don't trust that guy (or that collaboration, or that procedure)";
  •  "Oh yes, if this has been told you by . . . , then you can rely on it";
  •  "We have only used the calorimeter for this analysis, because we are
    not yet confident with the central detector";
  • The evening before I had to talk about this subject, I overheard the
    following conversation in the CERN cafeteria:
    6
      T h e Franklin's book "Experiment, right or wrong" [96] presents an interesting histor­
ical analysis of several classical XX century particle physics experiments. The physicist
activity is seen as a "set of strategies of reasonable beliefs in experimental results", which
can be "explained in terms of Bayesian confirmation          theory".
      My preferred motto on this matter is "no one should be allowed to speak about objec­
tivity unless he has had 10-20 years working experience in frontier science, economics,
or any other applied field".
218              Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


       — Young fellow:      "I have measured the resistivity,      and it turns out to
          6elOnft";
       — Senior: "No, it cannot be. Tomorrow I will make the      measurement
         and I am sure to get the right value. ... By the way, have you con­
         sidered that ... ?"

T h e statistician Don Berry [97] amused himself by counting how many times
Stephen Hawking uses 'belief, 'to believe', or synonyms, in his 'A brief
history of time'. T h e book could have been entitled 'A brief history of
beliefs', Berry pointed out in his talk. By the way, as other famous physicists
cited in this book, Hawking too likes to express his beliefs in terms of bets.
Here is a bet between Kip Thorne and Hawking as t o whether Cygnus X - l
is a black hole:

        "Whereas Stephen Hawking has a large investment in General Relativity
       and Black Holes and desires an insurance policy, and whereas Kip Thorne
       likes to live dangerously without an insurance policy,
       Therefore be it resolved that Stephen Hawking bets 1 year's subscription
       to 'Penthouse' as against Kip Thome's wager of a 4-year subscription
       to 'Private Eye', that Cignus X-l does not contain a black hole of mass
       above the Chandrasekhar limit." [98]

T h e role of beliefs in physics has been highlighted in a particularly efficient
way by the science historian Peter Galison[61]:

        "Experiments begin and end in a matrix of beliefs. ... beliefs in instru­
       ment type, in programs of experiment enquiry, in the trained, individual
       judgments about every local behavior of pieces of apparatus."

Then, taking as an example the discovery of the positron, he remarks:

        "Taken out of time there is no sense to the judgment that Anderson's
       track 75 [see Fig. 10.1] is a positive electron; its textbook reproduction
       has been denuded of the prior experience that made Anderson confident
       in the cloud chamber, the magnet, the optics, and the photography."8

This means t h a t pure observation does not create, or increase, knowledge
without personal inputs which are needed to elaborate the information. 9
   8
    For an accurate historical account of the positron discovery Ref. [99] is recommended.
   9
    A few years ago, I met an elderly physicist at a meeting of the Italian Physical Society,
who was nostalgic about the good old times when "we could see IT —> fj, —► e decay in
emulsions", and complained that at present the sophisticated electronic experiments are
based on models. It took me a while to convince him that in emulsions too he had a
             Miscellanea on general issues in probability and   inference   219




                Fig. 10.1   Anderson's first picture of a positron track.


In fact, there is nothing really objective in physics, if by objective we mean
that something follows necessarily from observation, like the proof of a
theorem. There are, instead, beliefs everywhere. Nevertheless, physics is
objective, or at least that part of it that is at present well established, if
we mean by 'objective', that a rational individual cannot avoid believing
it. This is the reason why we can talk in a relaxed way about beliefs in
physics without even remotely thinking that it is at the same level as the
stock exchange, betting on football scores, or . . . New Age. The reason
is that, after centuries of experimentation, theoretical work and successful
predictions, there is such a consistent network of beliefs, it has acquired
the status of an objective construction: one cannot mistrust one of the
elements of the network without contradicting many others. Around this
solid core of objective knowledge there are fuzzy borders which correspond
to areas of present investigations, where the level of intersubjectivity is
still very low. Nevertheless, when one proposes a new theory or model,
one has to check immediately whether it contradicts some well-established
beliefs. An interesting example comes from the 1997 HERA high Q2 events,
already discussed in Sec. 1.9. A positive consequence of this claim was to
trigger a kind of mega-exercise undertaken by many theorists, consisting
model and that he was not seeing these particles either.
220             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical introduction


of systematic cross-checks of HERA data, candidate theories, and previous
experimental data. The conclusion is that the most influential physicists 10
tend not to believe a possible explanation in terms of new physics [100,101].
But this has little to do with the 'statistical significance' of the events. It
is more a question of the difficulty of inserting this evidence into what is
considered to be the most likely network of beliefs.
    I would like to conclude this section with a Feynman quotation [102].

       "Some years ago I had a conversation with a layman about Hying saucers
      - because I am scientific I know all about flying saucers! I said T don't
      think there are flying saucers'. So my antagonist said, 'Is it impossible
      that there are flying saucers? Can you prove that it's impossible?' 'No',
      I said, 'I can't prove it's impossible. It's just very unlikely'. At that he
      said, 'You are very unscientific. If you can't prove it impossible then how
      can you say that it's unlikely?' But that is the way that is scientific. It
      is scientific only to say what is more likely and what less likely, and not
      to be proving all the time the possible and impossible. To define what I
      mean, I might have said to him, 'Listen, I mean that from my knowledge
      of the world that I see around me, I think that it is much more likely
      that the reports of flying saucers are the results of the known irrational
      characteristics of terrestrial intelligence than of the unknown rational
      efforts of extra-terrestrial intelligence'. It is just more likely. That is
      all."



10.5     Frequentists and Bayesian 'sects'

Many readers may be interested in how the problem 'to Bayes or not to
Bayes' is viewed by statisticians. In order to thoroughly analyze the situa­
tion, one should make a detailed study not only of the probability theory,
but also of the history and sociology of statistical science. The most I can
do here is to give personal impressions, certainly biased, and some refer­
ences. I invite the reader to visit the statistics department in his University,
browse their journals and books, and talk to people (and to judge the dif­
ferent theses by the logical strength of their arguments, not weighing them
just by numbers...).
  10
     Outstanding physicists have no reluctance in talking explicitly about beliefs. Then,
paradoxically, objective science is for those who avoid the word 'belief nothing but the
set of beliefs of the influential scientists to which they believe...
            Miscellanea on general issues in probability and   inference          221


10.5.1    Bayesian     versus    frequentistic       methods

An often cited paper for a reasonably balanced discussion [79] on the sub­
ject is the article "Why isn't everyone a Bayesian?", by B. Efron [103]. Key
words of the paper are: Fisherian inference; Frequentistic theory;       Neyman-
Pearson-Wald;      Objectivity.    For this reason, pointing out this paper as
'balanced' is not really fair. Nevertheless, I recommend reading the arti­
cle, together with the accompanying comments and the reply by the author
published in the same issue of the journal (a typical practice amongst statis­
ticians).
     So, it is true t h a t "Fisherian and Neyman-Pearson-Wald       ideas have
shouldered Bayesian theory aside in statistical practice" [103], but "The an­
swer is simply that statisticians do not know what the statistical      paradigm
says. Why should they? There are very few universities in the world with
statistics departments that provides a good course on the subject." [104] Es­
sentially, the main point of the Efron paper is to maintain traditional meth­
ods, despite the "disturbing catalog of inconsistencies" [103], and the "pow­
erful theoretical reasons for preferring Bayesian inference" [103]. Moreover,
perhaps not everybody who cites the Efron paper is aware of further dis­
cussions about it, like the letter in which Zellner[105] points out t h a t one
of the problems posed by Efron already had a Bayesian solution (in the
Jeffreys' book [49]), t h a t Efron admitted to knowing and even to having
used [106]. As a kind of final comment on this debated paper, I would like
t o cite Efron's last published reply I am aware of [106]:

     "First of all let me thank the writers for taking my article in its in­
    tended spirit: not as an attack on the Bayesian enterprise, but rather as
    a critique of its preoccupation with philosophical questions, to the detri­
    ment of statistical practice. Meanwhile I have received some papers, in
    particular one from A.F.M. Smith, which show a healthy Bayesian in­
    terest in applications, so my worries were overstated if not completely
    groundless."

    There are some other references which I would like to suggest if you
are interested in forming your own opinion on the subject. They have also
appeared in T h e American Statistician, where in 1997 an entire Teaching
Corner section of the journal [97] was devoted to three papers presented
in a round table on 'Bayesian possibilities for introductory statistics' at
the 156th Annual Meeting of t h e American Statistical Association, held in
Chicago, in August 1996. For me these articles are particularly important
222             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


because I was by chance in the audience of the round table (really 'by
chance'!). At the end of the presentations I was finally convinced t h a t
frequentism was dead, at least as a philosophical idea. I must say, I was
persuaded by the non-arguments of the defender of frequentism even more
t h a n by the arguments of the defenders of the Bayesian approach. I report
here the abstract 1 1 of Moore, who presented the 'reason to hesitate' t o
teach Bayesian statistics:

       "The thesis of this paper is that Bayesian inference, important though it
      is for statisticians, is among the mainly important statistical topics that
      it is wise to avoid in most introductory instruction. The first reason is
      pragmatic (and empirical): Bayesian methods are as yet relatively little
      used in practice. We have an obligation to prepare students to under­
      stand the statistics they will meet in their further studies and work, not
      the statistics we may hope will someday replace now-standard methods.
      A second argument also reflects current conditions: Bayesians do not
      agree on standard approaches to standard problem settings. Finally, the
      reasoning of Bayesian inference, depending as it does on ideas of condi­
      tional probability, is quite difficult for beginners to appreciate. There is
      of course no easy path to a conceptual grasp of inference, but standard
      inference at least rests on repetition of one straightforward question,
      What would happen if I did this many times? "

Even if some arguments might be valid, thinking about statisticians who
make surveys in a standardized form (in fields t h a t they rarely understand,
such as medicine and agriculture), surely they do not hold in physics, even
less in frontier physics. As I commented to Moore after his talk, what is
important for a physicist is not "what would happen if I did this many
times?", but "what am I learning by the experiment?". 1 2


10.5.2      Subjective    or objective     Bayesian        theory?

Once you have understood t h a t probability and frequencies are different
concepts, t h a t probability of hypothesis is a useful and natural concept for
   11
      1 quote here the original abstract, which appears on page 18 of the conference ab­
stract book.
   12
      I also made other comments on the general illogicality of his arguments, which you
may easily imagine by reading the abstract. For these comments I even received applause
from the audience, which really surprised me, until I learned that David Moore is one of
the most authoritative American statisticians: only a outsider like me would have said
what I said...
             Miscellanea on general issues in probability and   inference         223


reporting results, t h a t Bayes' theorem is a powerful tool for updating prob­
ability and learning from data, t h a t priors are i m p o r t a n t and pretending
t h a t they do not exist is equivalent to assuming t h e m flat, and so on, it
is difficult t o t h e n take a step back. However, it is t r u e t h a t there is n o
single shared point of view among those who, generally speaking, support
the Bayesian approach. I don't pretend t h a t I can provide an exhaustive
analyze of the situation here, or to be unbiased about this m a t t e r either.
       T h e main schools of thought are t h e 'subjectivists' and the 'objectivists'.
T h e dispute may look strange to an outsider, if one thinks t h a t both schools
use probability t o represent degrees of belief. Nevertheless, objectivists
want to minimize the person's contribution to the inference, by introduc­
ing reference priors (for example Jeffreys' priors [49]) or other constraints,
such as maximum entropy (for an overview see Refs. [27] and [107]). T h e
m o t t o is "let the data speak for themselves". I find this subject highly con­
fusing, and even Bernardo and Smith (Bernardo is one of t h e key persons
behind reference priors) give the impression of contradicting themselves of­
ten on this point as, for example, when the subject of reference analysis is
introduced:

     "to many attracted to the formalism of the Bayesian inferential
    paradigm, the idea of a non-informative prior distribution, representing
    'ignorance' and 'letting the data speak for themselves' has proved ex­
    tremely seductive, often being regarded as synonymous with providing
    objective inferences. It will be clear from the general subjective per­
    spective we have maintained throughout this volume, that we regard
    this search for 'objectivity' to be misguided. However, it will also be
    clear from our detailed development in Section 5.4 that we recognize the
    rather special nature and role of the concept of a 'minimal informative'
    prior specification - appropriately defined! In any case, the considerable
    body of conceptual and theoretical literature devoted to identifying 'ap­
    propriate' procedures for formulating prior representations of 'ignorance'
    constitutes a fascinating chapter in the history of Bayesian Statistics. In
    this section we shall provide an overview of some of the main directions
    followed in this search for a Bayesian 'Holy Grail'. [27]

In my point of view, the extreme idea along this line is represented by
the Jaynes' 'robot' ("In order to direct attention to constructive things and
away from controversial irrelevance, we shall invent an imaginary being. Its
brain is to be designed by us, so that it reasons according to certain defined
rules. These rules will be deduced from simple desiderata which, it appears
224             Bayesian   reasoning in data analysis: A critical    introduction


to us, would be desirable in human brains"[108]).
    As far as I understand it, I see only problems with objectivism, although
I do agree on the notion of a commonly perceived objectivity, in the sense
of intersubjectivity (see Sec. 10.4). Frankly, I find probabilistic evaluations
made by a coherent subjectivist, assessed under personal responsibility, to
be more trustworthy and more objective than values obtained in a mechan­
ical way using objective prescriptions [33].
    Moving to a philosophical level deeper than this kind of angels' sex
debate (see Sec. 3.11), there is the important issue of what an event is.
All events listed in Sec. 10.1 (apart from that of point 4) are somehow
verifiable. Perhaps one will have to wait until tomorrow, the end of 1999,
or 2010, but at a certain point the event may become certain, either true or
false. However, one can think about other events, examples of which have
been shown in these notes, that are not verifiable, either for a question of
principle, or by accident.

  • The old friend could die, carrying with him the secret of whether he
    had been cheating, or simply lucky (Sec. 3.6).
  • The particle interacts with the detector (Sec. 3.5.4) and continues its
    flight: was it really a IT or a \i1
  • Using our best knowledge about temperature measurement we can state
    that the temperature of a room at a certain instant is 21.7 ± 0.3 °C
    with 95% probability (Sec. 10.1); after the measurement the window is
    opened, the weather changes, the thermometer is lost: how is it possible
    to verify the event '21.4 < T/°C < 22.0'?

This problem is present every time we make a probabilistic statement about
physics quantities. It is present not only when a measurand is critically
time dependent (the position of a plane above the Atlantic), but also in the
case of fundamental constants. In this latter case we usually believe in the
progress of science and thus we hope that the quantity will be measured
so well in the future that it will one day become a kind of exact value, in
comparison to today's uncertainty. But it is absurd to think that one day
we will be able to 'open an electron' and read on a label all its properties
with an infinite number of digits. This means that for scientific applications
it is convenient to enlarge the concept of an event (see Sec. 3.2), releasing
the condition of verifiability.13 At this point the normative role of the
  13
     It is interesting to realize, in the light of this reflection, that the ISO definition of
true value ("a value compatible with the definition of a given particular quantity", see
Sees. 1.2 and 1.3) can accommodate this point of view.
             Miscellanea on general issues in probability and inference                225


hypothetical coherent bet becomes crucial. A probability evaluation, made
by an honest person well-trained in applying coherence on verifiable events,
becomes, in my opinion, the only means by which degrees of belief can be
exchanged among rational people. 14 We have certainly reached a point in
which the domain of physics, metaphysics and moral overlap, but it looks
to me that this is exactly the way in which science advances.
    It seems to me that almost all Bayesian schools support this idea of
the extended meaning of an event, explicitly or tacitly (anyone who speaks
about /(#), with 9 a parameter of a distribution, does it). A more radical
point of view, which is very appealing from the philosophical perspective,
but more difficult to apply (especially as long as the quantification of the
uncertainty in measurements is concerned) is the predictive approach (or
operational subjectivism), along the lines of de Finetti's thinking. The con­
cept of probability is strictly applied only to real observables, very precisely
('operationally') defined.15 The events are all associated with discrete un­
certain numbers (integer or rational), in the simplest case 1 or 0 if there
are only two possibilities (true or false). Having excluded non-observables,
it makes no sense to speak of f{n | data), but only of f(x | data), where X
stands for a future (or, in general, not yet known) observation (see Sec. 6.6).
For the moment I prefer to stick to our 'metaphysical' true values, but I
encourage anyone who is interested in this subject to read Lad's book [69],
which also contains a very interesting philosophical and historical intro­
duction to the subject. For a recent presentation of this approach, see also
Coletti-Scozzafava treatise [70].

  14
        Take, for example, the bet used by Laplace to report his conclusion about boy/girl
birth chance in Paris (see quote at the beginning of Chapter 7). A bet which needs
hundred seventy-five years to be settled is meaningless. Moreover, nobody would consider
Laplace so naive to believe that the population in Paris would remain stationary hundreds
of years. Therefore, that bet can only be understood as a virtual bet to express his degree
of belief.
     15
        This point of view is followed not only by mathematicians or philosophers. Here is
how Schrodinger defines the event in his "Foundation of the theory of probability" [41].
 "By event we understand for the present purpose a simple or arbitrary          complicated
individual state of affairs (or fact or occurrence or happening) which either does or
conceivably might obtain in the real world around us and of which we are given a
description in words, clear and accurate enough to leave us no doubt, that by taking (or
having taken at the time or times in question) sufficient cognizance of the relevant part
of the world it would be possible to decide unambiguously, whether this particular fact
(or state of affairs, etc.) actually obtains or not, any third possibility being excluded.
. . . As verbal descriptions not fulfilling the requirement and thus, in my opinion, not
specifying an event, let me mention 'The distance between the towns D. and G. is between
157.357124 and 157.357125'."
226            Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical     introduction


10.5.3     Bayes'     theorem is not         everything
Finally, I would like to recall that Bayes' theorem is a very important tool,
but it can be used only when the scheme of prior, likelihood, and final is
set up, and the distributions are properly normalized. This happens very
often in measurement uncertainty problems, but less frequently in other ap­
plications, such as assessing the probabilities of hypotheses. When Bayes'
theorem is not applicable, conclusions may become strongly dependent on
individuals and the only guidance remains the normative rule of the hypo­
thetical coherent bet.


10.6     Biased Bayesian estimators and Monte Carlo checks
         of Bayesian procedures

This problem has already been raised in Sees. 5.2 and 5.3. We have seen
there that the expected value of a parameter can be considered, somehow,
to be analogous to the estimators 16 of the frequentistic approach. It is
well known, from courses on conventional statistics, that one of the nice
properties an estimator should have is that of being free of bias.
    Let us consider the case of Poisson and binomial distributed observa­
tions, exactly as they have been treated in Sees. 7.1 and 7.4, i.e. assuming
a uniform prior. Using the typical notation of frequentistic analysis, let us
indicate with 6 the parameter to be inferred, with 9 its estimator.

Poisson: 6 = A; X indicates the possible observation and 0 is the estimator
   in the light of X:

                                  6 = E(A | X) = X + 1,
                              E(0) = E(X + 1) = A + l ^ A .                         (10.3)

      The estimator is biased, but consistent (the bias become negligible when
   16
      It is worth remembering that, in the Bayesian approach, the complete answer is
given by the final distribution. The prevision ('expected value') is just a way of sum­
marizing the result, together with the standard uncertainty. Besides motivations based
on penalty rules, which we cannot discuss, a practical justification is that what matters
for any further approximate analysis, are expected values and standard deviation, whose
properties are used in uncertainty propagation. There is nothing wrong in providing the
mode(s) of the distribution or any other quantity one finds it sensible to summarize /(/*)
as well. What I dislike is the reduction of one of these summaries of the final probability
density function to a 'Bayesian estimator' in the frequentistic sense. And, unfortunately,
when many practitioners say to use Bayesian statistics, they refer to orrible things of
this kind.
             Miscellanea on general issues in probability and   inference            227


   X is large).
Binomial: 9 = p; after n trials one may observe X favorable results, and
   the estimator of p is then

                              0 = E(p IX) = ^±1 ,



    In this case as well the estimator is biased, but consistent.

What does it mean? The result looks worrying at first sight, but, in reality,
it is the analysis of bias that is misleading. In fact:

  • the initial intent is to reconstruct at best the parameter, i.e. the true
    value of the physical quantity identified with it;
  • the freedom from bias requires only that the expected value of the
    estimator should equal the value of the parameter, for a given value of
    the parameter,

                               E(9\6)=9             (e.g. E(A | A) = A),

                 (i.e.   r§f(§\0)d§     = 0).                                    (10.5)

But what is the true value of 91 We don't know, otherwise we would not
be wasting our time trying to estimate it (always keep real situations in
mind!). For this reason, our considerations cannot depend only on the
fluctuations of 9 around 6, but also on the different degrees of belief of the
possible values of 6. Therefore they must depend also on fo(0). For this
reason, the Bayesian result is that which makes the best use 17 of the state
of knowledge about 9 and of the distribution of 9 for each possible value 9.
This can be easily understood by going back to the examples of Sec. 1.7. It
is also easy to see that the freedom from bias of the frequentistic approach
requires f0(9) to be uniformly distributed from —oo to +oo (implicitly,
as frequentists refuse the very concept of probability of 9). Essentially,
  17
     I refer to the steps followed in the proof of Bayes' theorem given in Sec. 2.7. They
should convince the reader that f(9 \ 9) calculated in this way is the best we can say
about 8. Some say that "in the Bayesian inference the answer is the answer" (I have
heard this sentence from Adrian Smith at the Valencia-6 conference), in the sense that
one can use all his best knowledge to evaluate the probability of an event, but then,
whatever happens, cannot change the assessed probability, but, at most, it can — and
must — be taken into account for the next assessment of a different, although analogous
event.
228          Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


whenever a parameter has a limited range, the frequentistic analysis decrees
that Bayesian estimators are biased.
    There is another important and subtle point related to this problem,
namely that of the Monte Carlo check of Bayesian methods. Let us consider
the case depicted in Fig. 1.3 and imagine making a simulation, choosing the
value fi0 = 1.1, generating many (e.g. 10000) events, and considering three
different analyses:
(1) a maximum likelihood analysis;
(2) a Bayesian analysis, using a flat distribution for fi;
(3) a Bayesian analysis, using a distribution of /i 'of the kind' / 0 (/i) of
    Fig. 1.3, assuming that we have a good idea of the kind of physics we
    are doing.
Which analysis will reconstruct a value closest to /x0? You don't really need
to run the Monte Carlo to realize that the first two procedures will perform
equally well, while the third one, advertised as the best in these notes, will
systematically underestimate n0l
    Now, let us assume we have observed a value of x, for example x = 1.1.
Which analysis would you use to infer the value of (il Considering only
the results of the Monte Carlo simulation it seems obvious that one should
choose one of the first two, but certainly not the third!
    This way of thinking is wrong, but unfortunately it is often used by
practitioners who have no time to understand what is behind Bayesian rea­
soning, who perform some Monte Carlo tests, and decide that the Bayesian
statistics "does not work" (this is an actual statement I have heard by some
particle physics colleague). The solution to this apparent paradox is simple.
If you believe that \i is distributed like f0{n) of Fig. 1.3, then you should
use this distribution in the analysis and also in the generator. Making a
simulation based only on a single true value, or on a set of points with equal
weight, is equivalent to assuming a flat distribution for /x and, therefore, it
is not surprising that the most grounded Bayesian analysis is that which
performs worst in the simple-minded frequentistic checks. It is also worth
remembering that priors are not just mathematical objects to be plugged
into Bayes' theorem, but must reflect prior knowledge. Any inconsistent
use of them leads to paradoxical results.
                  Miscellanea       on general issues in probability and                 inference                     229


10.7        Frequentistic              coverage


A n o t h e r prejudice t o w a r d Bayesian inference shared by practitioners w h o
h a v e g r o w n u p w i t h c o n v e n t i o n a l s t a t i s t i c s is r e l a t e d t o t h e s o - c a l l e d 'fre­
q u e n t i s t i c c o v e r a g e ' . S i n c e , in m y o p i n i o n , t h i s is a k i n d of c o n d e n s a t e of
f r e q u e n t i s t i c n o n s e n s e , 1 8 I a v o i d s u m m a r i z i n g it i n m y o w n w o r d s , a s t h e
r i s k of d i s t o r t i n g s o m e t h i n g in w h i c h I c a n n o t see a n y m e a n i n g is t o o h i g h .
A q u o t a t i o n 1 9 t a k e n f r o m Ref. [110] s h o u l d ' c l a r i f y ' t h e i s s u e :

       "Although    particle physicists         may use the words 'confidence           interval'
      loosely, the most common meaning is still in terms of original classical
      concept of "coverage" which follows from the method of                        construction
      suggested in Fig. ... This concept is usually stated (too narrowly, as
      noted below) in terms of a hypothetical             ensemble of similar       experiments,
      each of which measures m and computes                   a confidence interval for m j
      with say, 68% C.L. Then the classical construction                 guarantees    that in
      the limit of a large ensemble, 68% of the confidence intervals                     contain
      the unknown true value mt, i.e., they 'cover' mt. This property,                     called
      coverage in the frequentistic           sense, is the defining property of classical
      confidence intervals.          It is important    to see this property as what it is:
      it reflects the relative frequency with which the statement,               'mt is in the
      interval ( m i , m . 2 ) ' , is a true statement.      The probabilistic    variables in
      this statement       are mi and mi; mt is fixed and unknown.               It is equally
      important    to see what frequentistic         coverage is not: it is not a statement
      about the degree of belief that mt lies within the confidence                      interval
      of a particular experiment.            The whole concept of 'degree of belief          does
      not exist with respect to classical confidence intervals, which are cleverly
      (some would say devilishly) defined by a construction              which keeps      strictly

     Gunter Zech says, more optimistically: "Coverage is the magic objective of classical
confidence bounds. It is an attractive property from a purely aesthetic point of view but
it is not obvious how to make use of this concept. "[109] But I think that Aristoteles
would have gotten mad if somebody had tried to convince him of the proposition "the
interval contains 0O with probability /3" does not imply "0O is in that interval with
probability /3". Zech seems to me to be overly patient in comparing frequentist and
Bayesian methods [11] from a pragmatic physicist's point of view (in the sense Ref. [30]),
reaching at the conclusion that "classical methods are not recommended because they
violate the Likehood Principle, they can produce inconsistent results, suffer from lack
of precision and generality." Instead, I usually refuse to make systematic comparisons
of frequentist versus Bayesian methods for solving the same problem, simply because I
was taught in elementary school - and I still believe it is correct - not to compare or
add non-homogeneous objects, like apples and potatoes, meters and liters . . . and then
frequentistic CL's and probability intervals. For a clear and concise introduction to
what frequentistic confidences mean and of what they do not mean (together with some
historical remarks) see Ref. [12].
   1
     The translation of the symbols is as follows: m stands for the measured quantity (x
or 6 in these notes); mt stands for the true value {JJL or 9 here); P(- | ■) for / ( • | •).
230             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical introduction


      to statements about P(m | mt) and never uses a probability density in
      the variable mt.
      This strict classical approach can be considered to be either a virtue or
      a Haw, but I think that both critics and adherents commonly make a
      mistake in describing coverage from the narrow point of view which I
      described in the preceding paragraph. As Neyman himself pointed out
      from the beginning, the concept of coverage is not restricted to the idea of
      an ensemble of hypothetical nearly-identical experiments. Classical con­
      fidence intervals have a much more powerful property: if, in an ensemble
      of real, different, experiments, each experiment measures whatever ob-
      servables it likes, and construct a 68% C.L. confidence interval, then in
      the long run 68% of the confidence intervals cover the true value of their
      respective observables. This is directly applicable to real life, and is the
      real beauty of classical confidence intervals."

I think t h a t the reader can judge for himself whether this approach seems
reasonable. From the Bayesian point of view, the full answer is provided
by P(mt | m), to use the same notation of Ref. [110]. If this evaluation has
been carried out under the requirement of coherence, from P{m,t \ m) one
can evaluate a probability for mt t o lie in the interval (7711,7712). If this
probability is for instance 68%, it implies:

  • one believes 68% t h a t mt is in t h a t interval;
  • one is ready to place a sa 2 : 1 bet on mt being in t h a t interval and a
    « 1 : 2 bet on m j being elsewhere;
  • if one imagines n situations in which one has similar conditions and
    thinks of the relative frequency with which one expects t h a t this state­
    ment will be t r u e (fn), logic applied to the basic rules of probability
    implies t h a t , with the increasing n, one considers more and more im­
    probable t h a t / „ will differ much from 68% (Bernoulli theorem, see
    Sec. 7.3).

So, the intuitive concept of 'coverage' is naturally included in the Bayesian
result and it is expressed in intuitive terms (probability of true value and
expected frequency). But this result has to depend also on priors, as seen
in the previous section and in many other places in this report (see, for
example, Sec. 1.7). Talking about coverage independently of prior knowl­
edge (as frequentists do) makes no sense, and leads to contradictions and
paradoxes. Imagine, for example, an experiment operated for one hour in
a collider having a center of mass energy of 200 GeV and reporting zero
             Miscellanea on general issues in probability and     inference             231


candidate events for zirconium-antizirconium production 20 in e + e~ in the
absence of expected background. I do not think that there is a single par­
ticle physicist ready to believe that, if the experiment is repeated many
times, in only 68% of the cases the 68% C.L. interval [0.00, 1.29] will con­
tain the true value of the 'Poisson signal mean', as a blind use of Table II
of Ref. [73] would imply.21 If this example seems a bit odd, I invite you
to think about the many 95% C.L. lower limits on the mass of postulated
particles published in the last decades. Do you really believe that in 95%
of the cases the mass is above the limit, and in 5% of the cases below the
limit? If this is the case, you would bet $5 on a mass value below the limit,
and receive $100 if this happened to be true (you should be ready to accept
the bet, since, if you believe in frequentistic coverage, you must admit that
the bet is fair). But perhaps you will never accept such a bet because you
believe much more than 95% that the mass is above the limit, and then the
bet is not fair at all; or because you are aware of thousands of lower limits,
and a particle has never shown up on the 5% side... 2 2




  20
      Zirconium, of atomic mass about 91 could be produced in such collisions, from the
energy-momentum balance point of view. But, being a complex atom, it will 'never' be
produced in e + e - annihilations.
   21
      One would object that this is, more or less, the result that we could obtain making
a Bayesian analysis with a uniform prior. But it was said that this prior assumes a
positive attitude of the experimenters, i.e. that the experiment was planned, financed,
and operated by rational people, with the hope of observing something (see Sees. 6.7 and
7.4). This topic, together with the issue of reporting experimental results in a prior-free
way, is discussed in detail in Chapter 13.
   22
      According to one of the authors of the 'unified approach' (Ref. [73]), the reason "is
because people have been flip-flopping. Had they used a unified approach, this would not
have happened"[111]. Up to the end of 2002 the "unified approach" has been used for
hundreds of results in almost 200 papers. I wonder what the next excuse will be to justify
the fact that such confidence intervals are not 'true' as often as expected by frequentistic
coverage. In other words, the problem is not only about the meaning of the long term
property of frequentistic coverage, but it is a question of internal consistency. According
to the ideas at the basis of coverage, a statistical method could give an 'absurd' region
(like a null interval) in 5% of the cases and a 'tautological' interval (like [—oo, +oo]) in
95% of the cases, without being accused of inconsistency, since, in the long term, the
intervals cover the true value 95% of the times (see details in Ref. [12]). Here the problem
is that, besides what the intervals of the 'unified approach' might mean, experience shows
that they just do not do 'their job'.
232             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical introduction


10.7.1      Orthodox  teacher versus         sharp    student    - a    dialogue
            by George    Gabor

As a last comment about frequentistic ideas related t o confidence intervals
and coverage I would like to add here a nice dialogue, which was circulated
via internet on February 1999, with an introduction and comment by the
author, the statistician George Gabor [112] of Dalhousie University (Hali­
fax, N.S., C a n a d a ) . It was meant as a contribution to a discussion triggered
by D.A. Berry (that of Refs. [13,97]) a few days before.

       "Perhaps a Socratic exchange between an ideally sharp, i.e. not easily
      bamboozled student (S.) of a typical introductory statistics course and
      his prof (P.) is the best way to illustrate what I think of the issue. The
      class is at the point where confidence interval (CI) for the normal mean
      is introduced and illustrated with a concrete example for the Erst time.
      P . ...and so a 95% CI for the unknown mean is (1.2, 2.3).
      S. Excuse me sir, just a few minutes ago you emphasized that a CI
          is some kind of random interval with certain coverage properties in
          REPEATED trials.
      P . Correct.
      S. What, then, is the meaning of the interval above?
      P. Well, it is one of the many possible realizations from a collection of
          intervals of a certain kind.
      S. And can we say that the 95 collective, is somehow carried over to this
          particular realization ?
      P. No, we can't. It would be worse than incorrect; it would be mean­
          ingless for the probability claim is tied to the collective.
      S. Your claim is then meaningless?
      P . No, it isn't. There is actually a way, called Bayesian statistics, to
          attribute a single-trial meaning to it, but that is beyond the scope
          of this course. However, I can assure you that there is no numerical
          difference between the two approaches.
      S. Do you mean they always agree?
      P . No, but in this case they do provided that you have no reason, prior
          to obtaining the data, to believe that the unknown mean is in any
          particularly narrow area.
      S. Fair enough. I also noticed sir that you called it 'a' CI, instead of
          'the' CI. Are there others then?
      P. Yes, there are actually infinitely many ways to obtain CI's which
          all have the same coverage properties. But only the one above is a
          Bayesian interval (with the proviso above added, of course).
      S. Is Bayesian-ness the only way to justify the use of this particular one?
      P . No, there are other ways too, but they are complicated and they
          operate with concepts that draw their meaning from the collective
          (except the so called likelihood interval, but then this strange guy
            Miscellanea on general issues in probability and inference                            233


       does not operate with probability at all).

    It could be continued ad inSnitum. Assuming sufficiently more advanced
    students one could come up with similar exchanges concerning practically
    every frequentist concept orthodoxy operates with (sampling distribution
    of estimates, measures of performance, the very concept of independence,
    etc.). The point is that orthodoxy would fail at the first opportunity had
    students been sufficiently sharp, open minded, and inquisitive. That we
    are not humiliated repeatedly by such exchanges (in my long experience
    not a single one has ever taken place) says more about... well, I don't
    quite know about what — the way the mind plays tricks with the concept
    of probability? The background of our students? Both?
    Ultimately then we teach the orthodoxy not only because of intellectual
    inertia, tradition, and the rest; but also because, like good con artists, we
    can get away with it. And that I find very disturbing. I must agree with
    Basu's dictum that nothing in orthodox statistics makes sense unless
    it has a Bayesian interpretation. If, as is the case, the only thing one
    can say about frequentist methods is that they work only in so far as
    they don't violate the likelihood principle; and if they don't (and they
    frequently do), they numerically agree with a Bayesian procedure with
    some flat prior - then we should go ahead and teach the real thing, not
    the substitute.    (The latter, incidentally, can live only parasitically on
    an illicit Bayesian usage of its terms. Just ask an unsuspecting biologist
    how he thinks about a CI or a P-value.)
    One can understand, or perhaps follow is a better word, the historical
    reasons orthodoxy has become the prevailing view. Now, however, we
    know better."



10.8   W h y d o f r e q u e n t i s t i c h y p o t h e s i s t e s t s 'often w o r k ' ?

T h e problem of classifying hypotheses according to their credibility is nat­
ural in the Bayesian framework. Let us recall briefly the following way of
drawing conclusions about two hypotheses in the light of some data:

                     P(Hj 1 Data)        =   P(Datalfff)            P0(Hj)
                                                                                              [
                     P(H,-1 Data)            P ( D a t a | Hj) ' P0{Hj)      '                    ''

This form is very convenient, because:

 • it is valid even if the hypotheses Hi do not form a complete class [a nec­
   essary condition if, instead, one wants to give the result in the standard
   form of Bayes' theorem given by formula (3.11)];
234             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical      introduction


      it shows that the Bayes factor is an unbiased way of reporting the result
      (especially if a different initial probability could substantially change
      the conclusions);
      the Bayes factor depends only on the likelihoods of observed data and
      not at all on unobserved data (contrary to what happens in conven­
      tional statistics, where conclusions depend on the probability of all the
      configurations of data in the tails of the distribution 23 ). In other words,
      Bayes' theorem applies in the form (10.6) and not as

                 P(Hj | Data+Tail) _ P(Data+Tail | Hj)     P0{Hj)
                 P(Hj | Data+Tail) ~ P(Data+Tail| #.,■) ' P0(Hj) '


  • testing a single hypothesis does not make sense: one may talk of the
    probability of the Standard Model (SM) only if one is considering an
    Alternative Model (AM), thus getting, for example,

                      P(AM | Data) _ P(Data | AM) P P (AM)
                                                                           :
                      P(SM|Data) ~ P(Data|SM) ' P 0 (SM)

    P(Data | SM) can be arbitrarily small, but if there is not a reasonable
    alternative one has only to accept the fact that some events have been
    observed which are very far from the expectation value;
  • repeating what has been said several times, in the Bayesian scheme the
    conclusions depend only on observed data and on previous knowledge;
    in particular, they do not depend on
      — how the data have been combined;
      — data not observed and considered to be even rarer than the observed
       data;
      — what the experimenter was planning to do before starting to take
       data. (I am referring to predefined fiducial cuts and the stopping
       rule, which, according to the frequentistic scheme should be defined
       in the test protocol. Unfortunately I cannot discuss this matter here
       in detail and I recommend the reading of Ref. [13].)

At this point we can finally reply to the question: "why do commonly-used
methods of hypothesis testing usually work?" (see Sees 1.8 and 1.9).
   23
      The necessity of using integrated distributions is due to the fact that the probability
of observing a particular configuration is always very small, and a frequentistic test would
reject the null hypotheses.
             Miscellanea on general issues in probability and inference             235




      fOmlHl)


      f(e m iH 0 )
                                           0J                   02          0
Fig. 10.2 Testing a hypothesis Ho implies that one is ready to replace it with an alter­
native hypothesis.


    By reference to Fig. 10.2 (imagine for a moment the figure without the
curve H\), the argument that 6m provides evidence against Ha is intuitively
accepted and often works, not (only) because of probabilistic considerations
of 6 in the light of H0, but because it is often reasonable to imagine an
alternative hypothesis H\ that

(1) maximizes the likelihood f(6m \Hi) or, at least


                                                       L
                                    P(9m\H0)       *       '

(2) has a comparable prior [P0(Hi) ss P0(H0)], such that

                                                                           »1
           P(H0 10m)        f{6m | H0) ' P0(H0)        * f(0m | H0)
                                                                                 (10.7)

As counter-examples in which there is no correspondence between the prob­
ability of the tail and the Bayes factor, let us consider the observed data
point (xm = 5) and the three hypotheses of Fig. 10.3 to be compared. The
probabilities of the tails, i.e. P(X > xm | Hi) are equal to 9%, 13% and
4% for i = 1,2,3. Therefore H3 fails the 5% significance threshold, while
Hi passes the 5% threshold, but fails the 10%. The 'best agreement' seems
performed by H2. But this is certainly absurd, because f{xm \ H2) is equal
to zero, i.e. this hypothesis cannot produce that observation, and therefore
it should be falsified without any doubt! This is the effect of including the
probability of non-observed data (the tails) in the inference. Instead, the
Bayesian answer depends only on xm and the priors, as it logically should
236                    Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical                   introduction



0.5
      .    f(x)
                                                                       1
0.4
                                ^H2                                \
                                    N
0.3                     /                            H3
                   ",/
                    /'.
                   / •.                                                        4%
0.2                             /        \
                   /        y                \
                                                                       1 /
0.1
            V
              i
               i
                        /
                            /
                                            \
                                        ' -. \
                                                 \
                                                                       Vr  /         13%
                                                          \
                                                              s.       ■l^-'::-,..                      10
                                                                                                             x


  Fig. 10.3        Which of these three hypotheses is favored by the observation x = 5?.


be. The Bayes factors can be evaluated from

          f(xm         | Hi) : f(xm     | H2) : f(xm                   \ H3) = 0.044 : 0 : 0.22 .       (10.8)

Hypothesis #2 is ruled out, while the odds for H3 versus H\ increase by a
factor five.
    Figure 10.4 shows an example in which the experimental observation
cannot modify our beliefs, because the likelihood is the same for all hy­
potheses. This is the essence of the Likelihood Principle, a highly desirable
property of frequentistic methods, but often missed (see e.g. Ref. [11]).
    Summing up, even though there is no objective or logical reason why the
frequentistic scheme should work, the reason why it often does work is that
in many cases the test is made when one has serious doubts about the null
hypothesis and reasonable (belivable alternatives) are easily conceivable.
But a peak appearing in the middle of a distribution, or any excess of
events, is not, in itself, a hint of new physics (Fig. 10.5 is an invitation to
meditation...). My recommendations are therefore the following.

  • Be very careful when drawing conclusions from x 2 tests, '3cr golden
    rule', and other 'bits of magic';
  • Do not pay too much attention to fixed rules suggested by statistics 'ex­
    perts', supervisors, and even Nobel laureates, taking also into account
             Miscellanea on general issues in probability and inference             237




0.3


0.2


0.1




Fig. 10.4 The observation x = 5 cannot rationally update the reative beliefs on the four
hypotheses which could have caused it.


    that
      - they usually have permanent positions and risk less than PhD stu­
        dents and postdocs who do most of the real work;
      — they have been 'miseducated' by the exciting experience of the glori­
        ous 1950s to 1970s: as Giorgio Salvini says, "when I was young, and
        it was possible to go to sleep at night after having added within the
        day some important brick to the building of the elementary particle
        palace. We were certainly lucky. "[114]. Especially when they were
        hunting for resonances, priors were very high, and the 3-4 a rule
        was a good guide.
  • Fluctuations exist. There are millions of frequentistic tests made ev­
    ery year in the world. And there is no probability theorem ensuring
    that the most extreme fluctuations occur to a precise Chinese student,
    rather than to a large HEP collaboration (this is the same reasoning of
    many Italians who buy national lotteria tickets in Rome or in motorway
    restaurants, because 'these tickets win more often'...).
As a conclusion to these remarks, and to invite the reader to take with
much care the assumption of equiprobability of hypothesis (a hidden as­
sumption in many frequentistic methods), I would like to add this quotation
238             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical introduction



                   THECEMETERM GF PHHSiCS
                    iS FULL OFU/OWDERFUL
                              EFFECT^...




                    . . T H B T vtRS A r T e i ^ L£BD
                        T O THftRETlC R L , EXP R W L. WM^^S S


         Fig. 10.5 Experimental obituary (courtesy of Alvaro de Rujula[113]).

by Poincare[8]:

       "To make my meaning clearer, I go back to the game of ecarte mentioned
      before. [See Sec. 1.6] My adversary deals for the first time and turns up
      a icing. What is the probability that he is a sharper? The formulae
      ordinarily taught give 8/9, a result which is obviously rather surprising.
      If we look at it closer, we see that the conclusion is arrived at as if,
      before sitting down at the table, I had considered that there was one
      chance in two that my adversary was not honest. An absurd hypothesis,
      because in that case I should certainly not have played with him; and
      this explains the absurdity of the conclusion. The function on the d
      priori probability was unjustified, and that is why the conclusion of the d
      posteriori probability led me into an inadmissible result. The importance
      of this preliminary convention is obvious. I shall even add that if none
      were made, the problem of the d posteriori probability would have no
      meaning. It must be always made either explicitly or tacitly."
           Miscellanea on general issues in probability and inference                    239


10.9   Comparing 'complex' hypotheses — automatic Ock-
       ham' Razor

The comparison of hypotheses we have seen so far, recalled by Eq. (10.6) in
the previous section, applies when we have models which are 'simple', in the
sense that the likelihood does not depend on parameters of the models. In
general, each model has a different number of parameters and the situation
becomes a bit more complex. Let us consider, for example, models MA
characterized by UA parameters a , and MB with ns parameters /3. Using
probability rules, the Bayes factor now becomes
           P(Data|A^,7)        =    J P ( D a t a | A ^ a , J) / 0 ( a 11) da
                                                                                    [
           P(Date\MB,I)             fP(Da.ta\MB,P,I)fo(fi\I)d0                           ' '
                               =    /£A(<*;Data)/ 0 (o!)da                              (mm)
                                                                                {
                                    /£B(/3;Data)/o(/3)d/3'                                 '
where fo(ct\I) and fo((3\I) are the parameter priors. The inference de­
pends, then, on the integrated likelihood

                          f CM (9; Data) /„(0) d 0 ,                            (10.11)

where M and 6 stand for the generic model and its parameters. This
integrated likelihood is sometimes called evidence in statistical jargon. Note
that CM{Q', Data) has its largest value around the maximum likelihood
point 6ML, but the evidence takes into account all prior possibilities of the
parameters. Thus, it is not enough that the best fit of one model is superior
to its alternative, in the sense that, for instance,

                    CA{OIML;       Data) > £ B ( / 3 M L ; Data),               (10.12)

and hence, assuming Gaussian models (see Sec. 8.1),

                XA(«minx2;         Data) < XB^Pminx2'         Data
                                                                     )'         (10.13)
in order to prefer model MA to model MB- In this case there are not
only the model priors which matter, but also the space of possibilities of
the parameters, i.e. the adaptation capability of each model. It is well
understood that we do not choose a n n - 1 order polynomial as the best
description — 'best' in inferential terms — of the n experimental points,
though such a model always offers a 'perfect fit'. Similarly, we are much
more impressed by, and we tend a posteriori to believe more in, a theory
that absolutely predicts an experimental observation, within a reasonable
240             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical      introduction


error, than another theory which performs similarly or even better after
having adjusted a couple of parameters.
     This intuitive reasoning is expressed formally in Eqs. (10.9)-(10.10).
The 'evidence' is given integrating the product C{9) and fo(9) over the pa­
rameter space. So, the more fo(9) is concentrated around 9ML the greater
is the 'evidence' in favor of that model. Instead, a model with a volume of
the parameter space much larger than the one selected by C(9) gets disfa­
vored.24 The extreme limit is that of a hypothetical model with so many
parameters it can describe perfectly whatever we observe. We would never
take such a model seriously.
     This effect is highly welcome, and follows the Ockham's Razor scien­
tific rule of discarding unnecessarily complicated models ( "entities should
not be multiplied unnecessarily"). This rule comes out automatically in the
Bayesian approach. A nice introduction to the connection between Ock­
ham's Razor and Bayesian reasoning, with examples from physics, can be
found in Ref. [115], while Refs. [116,117,118] offer recent examples of ap­
plication of the method in cosmology, providing also a detailed presentation
of underlying Bayesian ideas. Oher useful information and examples can
be found in Ref. [119].
     Although Eq. (10.9) has the nice properties which relate it to Ockham's
Razor, its use requires deeper thought than was necessary in the parametric
inference seen in Chapters 6-7. This is due to the fact that we cannot use
improper priors (see Sec. 6.5). In fact, unless the models do not depend
on the same number of parameters, defined in the same ranges, improper
priors do not simplify in the numerator and the denominator of Eq. (10.9).
Therefore, some care has to be taken to choose proper priors depending
on the problem (see Refs. [115,116,117,118]). Reference [119] shows an
example of how this method 'chooses' the degree of a polynomial which
describes at best the data.




     Another way to understand the source of the effect is to consider the integrated
likelihood, or 'evidence', Eq. (10.11) as a average likelihood, i.e. average of the likelihood
CM{6'I Data) weighted with fo{0)- If there are 'many' values of 6 (more precisely, large
regions of the parameter space, since we are dealing with continuous quantities) for which
CM (0; Data) vanishes, these 'many' zero's make the average likelihood small.
           Miscellanea on general issues in probability and inference         241




                     Fig. 10.6   An example of belief network.


10.10     Bayesian networks

10.10.1    Networks     of beliefs - conceptual         and practical   ap­
           plications
In Sec. 10.4 I mentioned the network of beliefs which give the perceived
status of objectivity to consolidated science. In fact, belief networks, also
called Bayesian networks, are not only an abstract idea useful in epistemol-
ogy. They represent one of the most promising applications of Bayesian
inference and they have generated a renewed interest in the field of artifi­
cial intelligence, where they are used for expert systems, decision makers,
etc. [120] and even in forensic science [121].
    Although, to my knowledge, there are not yet specific physics applica­
tions of these methods, I would like to give a rough idea of what they are
and how they work, with the help of a simple example. You are visiting
some friends, and, minutes after being in their house, you sneeze. You know
you are allergic to pollen and to cats, but it could also be a cold. What is
the cause of the sneeze? Figure 10.6 sketches the problem. There are some
facts about which you are sure (the sneeze, the weather conditions and the
season), but you don't know if the sneeze is a symptom of a cold or of an
allergy. In particular, you don't know if there is a cat in the house.
    Then, you see a picture of your friend with a cat. This could be an
indication that they have a cat, but it is just an indication. Nevertheless,
this indication increases the probability that there is a cat around, and then
242          Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


the probability that the cause of the sneeze is cat's hair allergy increases,
while the probability of any other potential cause decreases. If you then
establish with certainty the presence of the cat, the cause of the allergy also
becomes practically certain.
    The idea of Bayesian networks is to build a network of causes and effects.
Each event, generally speaking, can be certain or uncertain. When there is
a new piece of evidence, this is transmitted to the whole network and all
the beliefs are updated. The research activity in this field consists of the
most efficient way of doing the calculation, using Bayesian inference, graph
theory, and numerical approximations.
    If one compares Bayesian networks with other ways of pursuing artificial
intelligence their superiority is rather clear: they are close to the natural
way of human reasoning, the initial beliefs can be those of experts (avoiding
the long training needed to set up, for example, neural networks, infeasible
in practical applications), and they learn by experience as soon as they
start to receive evidence.



10.10.2    The gold/silver      ring problem      in terms     of    Bayesian
           networks
As a simple Bayesian network, let us reconsider the gold/silver ring problem
of Chapter 3. The diagram is framed in the JavaBayes [122] interface. The
three upper bubbles ('nodes') of the left diagram of Fig. 10.8 correspond to
the variables of the problem. The variable Box has three equiprobable states
of value GG, GS and SS. The 'child' variable ObsA has two possible states,
G and S which might be true or false, with probabilities which depend on
the 'parent' Box. The conditional beliefs P(Obs_l | Box) are given by a
2 x 3 matrix

                               P(Obs_l | Box)
                                        Box
                           Obs.l GG GS        SS
                            G      1     1/2   0
                            S      0     1/2   1


also shown in a JavaBayes dialog box (Fig. 10.7). The second observation
Obs.2 depends on the box composition and the first result — it has two
parents — and needs a 2 x 3 x 2 array for its representation:
                     Miscellanea on general issues in probability and          inference                      243


  X-,-.                                                   ■n x
       Ociile          MOVR       Delete      Ourry     Observe




                                B 0
                                Box
                                                                      X   id                                   X

                                                                  I               pfCijbJ     | R<v.)




                   „0
                   Obs 1
                                              Obs 2
                                                                  I
                                                                                  l«    |    i) :>      n.n


                                                                      s          li.U        os         in


       tslil V i a t i c       FililfunUion       Fdil Kelwurk    i            Apply        Dismiss



Fig. 10.7 Bayesian network t o model t h e gold/silver ring p r o b l e m i m p l e m e n t e d
in JavaBayes [122]. T h e screenshot on t h e right shows t h e JavaBayes dialog b o x
for entering P ( O b s . l | B o x ) .




                                            P(Obs_2|ObsJL,Box)
                                             Obs.l = G       Obs_l = S
                                               Box             Box
                              Obs.2        GG GS       SS GG    GS     SS
                               G            1 0        0   0     1     0
                               S            0     1    0   0     0     1

Note that the probabilities of both outcomes have been set to zero if the
conditions are impossible (in general, the sum of all probabilities given the
same conditions have to sum up to 1). From these tables we can calcu­
late the joint probability function25 P(Obs_2, Obs.l, Box). This is done
'factorizing' conditional probabilities, using the well-known 'chain rule':

 P(Obs_2, Obs.l, Box) = P(Box) ■ P(Obs_l | Box) • P(Obs.21 Obs.l, Box)
                                                                                                        (10.14)

  25
    Note the extension of the concept of probability function to include states and not
only values of a quantity.
244          Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


                            P(0bs.2, Obs.l.Box)
                             Obs-1 = G        Obs-1 = 5
                               Box              Box
                Obs-2     GG GS       SS GG GS         SS
                 G        1/3    0     0    0    1/6    0
                 S         0    1/6    0    0     0    1/3


Note that the numbers in this table sum up to 1. Instead, the sum of the
numbers of the two rows gives the probability of getting gold or silver in
the second observation (the 'marginals'). They are both equal to 1/2, as to
be expected by symmetry. From this table we can get all other probability
function of interest, like P(Obs_2, Obs_l) and P(Obs_2, Box), P(Obs.l),
and so on. In particular, using Bayes' theorem, we get the probability of
the second observation conditioned by the first observation. Here are the
tables of P(Obs_2 | Obs_l) and P(Obs_2, Obs_l):


            P(Obs_2, Obs-1)                       P(Obs_21 Obs.l)
                     Obs-1                                 Obs_l
            Obs_2   G     S                       Obs-2   G     S
             G     1/3   1/6                       G     2/3   1/3
             S     1/6   1/3                       S     1/3   2/3


The answer to our problems is the first element of table P(Obs_2 | Obs_l),
i.e. P(0bs_2 = G | ObsJL = G) = 2 / 3 .
     Anyone who arrived more or less intuitively at the solution might think
this procedure is no more than a formal complication. However we only
need to make our network a bit more complicated and it becomes obvious
that intuition is of little help. Imagine we cannot observe the extracted
ring directly. The observations are mediated by persons and the possibility
exists that these persons could lie. They could lie in different ways, and
even react differently to gold and silver. This is the meaning of the two
bottom nodes in the diagram of Fig. 10.8. The situation seems bizarre,
but the analogy with detectors which lie (we say 'err') gives an idea of the
scientific relevance of this modelling.
     Let us assign some values to the probability functions P(Rep_l | Obs_l)
and P(Rep_2 | Obs.2)
            Miscellanea on general issues in probability and inference      245




Fig. 10.8 Bayesian network to model the gold/silver ring problem, complicated
by the possibility that whoever observes the ring might report something differ­
ent from what he sees. The two diagrams show the graphical representation of
evidence on Obs_l or on RepJ. and Rep_2 (darker bubbles).


             P(Rep.l | Obs_l)                      P(Rep_2 | Obs.2)
                       Obs.l                                Obs.2
             Rep_l   G      S                     Rep_2    G      S
              G     0.7 0.2                         G     0.75 0.1
               S    0.3 0.8                         S     0.25 0.9
and try to answer the following questions: a) what is the probabil­
ity that the first observer has seen Gold if he says Gold? b) what
is the probability that the second observer says Gold if the first ob­
server said Gold? c) What is the probability that the second observa­
tion was really Gold if both observers say Gold? d) What is the proba­
bility that the box content is SS if both observers said Gold? Bayesian
networks offer two kinds of help in answering these questions: concep­
tual help comes from the graphical representation of the problem; prac­
tical help, essential when problems become complicated, comes from the
powerful mathematical and computational tools that have become avail­
able in recent years. For example, this minimal variation of the ba­
sic problem is easily solved using JavaBayes. The details are given in
Ref. [123]. Let us give here the answers to only some of the questions:
246          Bayesian   reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


 • Probability that the observer has seen gold if he says gold:
             P(Obs-l | Rep-1)                          P(Obs_2 | Rep.2)
                       Rep.l                                    Rep.2
            Obs.l   G        S                        Obs-2   G       S
             G     0.78 0.27                           G     0.88 0.22
              S    0.22 0.73                            S    0.12 0.78


 • Probability of the second observation given the first report, and prob­
   ability of the second report given the first report
             P(Obs.2 | Obs.l)                          P(Rep_2 | Rep.l)
                       Obs.l                                    Rep.l
            Obs.2   G        S                        Rep.2   G       S
             G     0.59 0.42                            G    0.49 0.38
              S    0.41 0.58                            S    0.51 0.62


 • Probability of the box content given the two reports:
                                P(Box|Rep-l,Rep.2)
                 Rep.l = G        Rep.l = G Rep.l = S               Rep.l = S
          Box    Rep.2 = G        Rep.2 = S Rep.2 = G               Rep_2 = S
          GG        0.80             0.36       0.25                   0.07
          GS        0.17             0.51       0.49                   0.23
          SS        0.03             0.13       0.26                   0.70

More details can be found in Ref. [123], where the reasoning is extended
to include the treatment of uncertainty in measurement. In the cited web
site the simple version of the problem is solved 'by hand' using a Math-
ematica notebook. This gives an idea of the complex calculations needed
when the problem becomes complicated. When many nodes and continuous
node states (i.e. continuous random variables) are involved, the exact cal­
culations of all summations (i.e. integrals) becomes prohibitive and Monte
Carlo methods are needed. The most powerful techniques to perform nu­
merical calculations associated to Bayesian networks are based on Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). Many references and applications can be
found on the BUGS [124] web site (where also free software is available),
while a starting point to search for MCMC literature is Ref. [125].
                               Chapter 11

 Combination of experimental results:
            a closer look


                            "Every theory should be tested against experiment.
                            Every experiment should be tested against theory"




We provide here a practical example of how to model prior knowledge in
order to solve an often debated problem in physics: how to combine data in
the presence of 'outliers'. Before tackling this problem we recall the stan­
dard combination rule and its conditions of validity. The proposed method
was applied to what was considered a hot problem in frontier physics at the
end of the past century, i.e. the determination of the direct CP violation
parameter e'/e (see Ref. [126] for the latest experimental and references on
measurements and theory).


11.1   Use and misuse of the standard combination rule

Every physicist knows the rule for combining several experimental results,
which we have derived in Sec. 6.3, and rewrite here, for the reader conve­
nience, in the following form:

                                                                        (11.1)
                                                I

                                                                        (11.2)


where fi refers to (the best estimate of) the true value and di ± Sj stands
for the individual data point (the use of Sj, instead of the usual Ui, for the

                                     247
248           Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


"errors" by the experiments will become clear later).
    It is a matter of fact that these popular formulae, in many cases learned
as kind of practical formulae in laboratory courses, are often used a bit
blindly. Only when the result are manifestly odd, one is forced to think
that there is something strange going on. In some cases the radicated habit
to use uncritically these formulae leads to the misleading conclusion that
are the individual results to be 'wrong'. Two examples of this kind have
been shown already in Sec. 8.11. It is worth recalling here a case similar to
that discussed in Sec. 8.11 was reported by the PDG statistics experts [79]
as argument against Bayesian statistics.
    Let us take another numerical example of this kind. Three independent
counting experiments performed during equal observation time report the
following results: 4 ± \ / 4 , 7 ± \ / 7 , and 10±-\/l0. The combination according
to Eqs. (11.1)—(11.2) gives 6.0 ± 1.4. The result look suspicious, because
one would think of the three experiments as a single one running the triple
of time of the individual experiment. The result would then be 21 ± \f?A,
equivalent to 7.0±1.5 for a single experiment. Also in this case the standard
combination rule (11.1)—(11.2) has been misused. In fact, as shown in
Sec. 6.3, this rule is based on some important assumptions:

 i) all measurements refer to the same quantity;
ii) the measurements are independent;
Hi) the probability distribution of di around /J, is described by a Gaussian
    distribution with standard deviation given by CTJ = s;.

If one, or several, of these hypotheses are not satisfied, the result of formu­
lae (11.1)—(11.2) is questionable. In the case under study, the solution is
simple: assumption in) fails, and we have to solve the problem in the most
general way to infer the Poisson parameter A associated with the quantity
of interest. Following the procedure often used in Chapters 6 and 7, we get
(with obvious meaning of the symbols)

                        /(A|x)oce-"AA^"=^'/0(A),                               (11.3)

a result already shown in Eq. (7.65). Using the numbers of our example
and a uniform prior, we get a maximum of belief at A = 7, in agreement
with the intuitive considerations. The result in terms of expected value
and standard deviation is, instead, 7.3 ± 1.6. The reason of an expected
value slightly larger than 7 has already been discussed in Sec. 7.4, and it
is consistent with assumed prior knowledge. What is mostly remarkable is
               Combination   of experimental   results: a closer look     249


that we would get exactly the same result (p.d.f. and all other summaries)
if we considered an experiment having observed 21 counts.



11.2   'Apparently incompatible' experimental results

The case seen in the previous section was an easy one. More complicated
is the situation in which some data point 'seem to be incompatible.' Now
we are confronted with the problem that we are never absolutely sure if
the hypotheses behind the standard combination rule are true or not. If we
were absolutely convinced that the hypotheses were correct, there would
be no reason to hesitate to apply Eqs. (11.1)—(11.2), no matter how 'ap­
parently incompatible' the data points might appear. But we know from
experience that unrecognized sources of systematic errors might affect the
results, or that the uncertainty associated with the recognized sources might
be underestimated (but we also know that, often, this kind of uncertainty
is prudently overstated...).
    As is always the case in the domain of uncertainty, there is no 'objec­
tive' method for handling this problem; neither in deciding if the data are
in mutual disagreement, nor in arriving at a universal solution for handling
those cases which are judged to be troublesome. Only good sense gained by
experience can provide some guidance. Therefore, all automatic 'prescrip­
tions' should be considered cum grano salis. For example, the usual method
for checking the hypothesis that 'the data are compatible with each other'
is to make a x2 test. The hypothesis is accepted if, generally speaking, the
X2 does not differ too much from the expected value. As a strict rule, the
X2 test is not really logically grounded (Sec. 1.8) although it does 'often
work', due to implicit hypotheses which are external to the standard x2
test scheme (see Sec. 10.8), but which lead to mistaken conclusions when
the unstated hypotheses are not reasonable (Sec. 1.9). Therefore, I shall
not attempt here to quantify the degree of suspicion. I shall assume a situ­
ation in which experienced physicists, faced with a set of results, tend to be
uneasy about the mutual consistency of the picture that those data offer.
    As a real life example, which was considered a hot topic a couple of years
ago [127], let us consider the results of Tab. 11.1, which are also reported
in a graphical form in Fig. 11.1. Figure 11.2 shows also the combined
result obtained using Eqs. (11.1)—(11.2), as well as some combinations of
subsamples of the results.       These results have not been chosen as the
best example of disagreeing data, but because of the physics interest, and
250                Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical introduction



                    0.1


                                                                1
                   0.08                                                  \
                                                            /             .
                                                                          \
                                                            1
                                                                             \
                   0.06           '    \
                                  1        \
                                               / / \                \            \
                   0.04 ■ 1                    A
                       /
                         1                 /
                                               v ' ' \\ \\ »\
                                               /
                   o.oi
                        /
                    /           _ -/- -y-                                                                     —
      _   — — 7~ ~~' '
             * *            ■                                                                                       e
          -10                         10            20                  30                   40          50


Fig. 11.1 Results on Re(e'/«) obtained at CERN (solid line) and Fermilab (dashed
line), where e = Re(e'/ e ) x 10 4 .


also because the situation is at the edge of where one starts worrying. T h e
impression of uneasiness was not only because the mutual agreement among
t h e experimental results is not at the level one would have wished, but also
because the value of Re(e'/e) around which the experimental results cluster


          Table 11.1 Published results on Re(e'/e) (values in units of 10~ 4 ).
          Data points indicated by yj have been used for quantitative eval­
          uations. Owing to correlations between the 1988 and 1993 un­
          certainties of NA31, only the combined value published in 1993
          is used (see Ref. [127] for details and references).

                    Experiment                     Central value                     ±0
                                                                                       ~stat ± <* syst °~tot


           V       E731 (1988)                            32                               ±28   ± 12         30
                   NA31 (1988)                            33                              ±6.6   ±8.3         11
           V       E731 (1993)                            7.4                             ±5.2   ±2.9         5.9
                   NA31 (1993)                            20                              ±4.3   ±5.0          7
           V       NA31 (1988+1993)                      23.0                               ±4 ± 5            6.5
           V       KTeV (1999)                           28.0                             ±3.0 ± 2 . 8        4.1
           V       NA48 (1999)                           18.5                             ±4.5 ± 5 . 8        7.3
                 Combination         of experimental                      results: a closer look                                 251



         0.14                                                            f\
         0.12                                                                 1
          0.1

         0.08
                                               /^                 h \
         0.06                                                  \ /i \
         0.04                    /                             /V \ \
         0.02
                             /                                 /A \ \
                                                                                                                  ^_    .    P
                                10                               20                          30                        40


         0.14

         0.12                                                            /^
          0.1                                                   ll            \
                                                               il              \
         0.08
                                                               |/"~M
        0.06
                                                           /                       \
         0.04
                                                    />!                                \ \
         0.02
                        „,
                              ^/
                             "***\
                                                 //
                                     .-^,.:.:."' : , : '             ,
                                                                                        \N \ ^
                                                                                         '■■'>.,,>:   ^ * - ^ _
                                                                                                                        ,_   e
                               10                               20                           30                        40



Fig. 11.2 Some combinations of the experimental results obtained using the stan­
dard combination rule of Eqs. (11.1)—(11.2). Upper plot: old results (dashed
line), 1999 results (solid line), overall combination (dotted grey line). Lower plot:
CERN experiments (solid line), Fermilab experiments (dashed), overall combina­
tion (dotted grey line).


was somewhat far from the theoretical evaluations (see e.g. Ref. [128] and
references therein). Now, it is clear t h a t experimentalists should not be
biased towards theoretical expectations, and the history of physics teaches
us about wrong results published to please theory. B u t we are also aware of
unexpected results (either claims of new physics, or simply a quantitative
disagreement with respect to the global scenario offered by other results
within the framework of the Standard Model) which finally t u r n out to be
252             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical      introduction


false alarms. In conclusion, given the picture at that time of theory versus
experiments about e'/e, there was plenty of room for doubt: Doubt about
theory, about individual experiments, and about experiments as a whole.
    In this situation, drawing conclusions based on a blind application of
Eqs. (11.1)—(11.2) seems a bit naive. For example, a straightforward con­
clusion of the standard combination rule leads to a probability that Re(e'/e)
is smaller than zero of the order of 0.5 x 10~ 14 , and I don't think that
experienced physicists would have shared without hesitation beliefs of this
order of magnitude. As a matter of fact, at that time the question if CP
symmetry was directly violated in kaon decay was still highly debated, and
sophisticate experiments were still run to get evidence on value and size of
e'/e.



11.3     Sceptical combination of experimental results

Once we have understood what is behind the simple combination rule, it is
possible to change one of the hypotheses entering Eqs. (11.1)—(11.2). Obvi­
ously, the problem has no unique solution.1 This depends to a great extent
on the status of knowledge about the experiments which provided the re­
sults. For example, if one has formed a personal idea concerning the degree
of reliability of the different experimental teams, one can attribute different
weights to different results, or even disregard results considered unreliable
or obsolete (for example their corrections for systematic effects could de­
pend on theoretical inputs which are now considered to be obsolete).2
    Wishing to arrive at a solution which, with all the imaginable limitations
a general solution may have, is applicable to many situations without an
inside, detailed knowledge of each individual experiment, we have to make
some choices. First, we decide that our sceptic is democratic, i.e. 'he' has
no a priori preference for a particular experiment. Second, the easiest way
of modelling his scepticism, keeping the mathematics simple, is to consider


    ' T h e method discussed here follows the basic ideas of Ref. [129]. See Ref. [130] for an
alternative approach.
    2
      For example, it is known that Millikan applied quality-of-measurement rating to
his electron charge determination, or selected in a pure subjective way the values to
calculate the mean value. The method might seem 'not scientific', but it is amazing that
the average obtained using 58 data points selected from a total of 140 gave a value which
is still in excellent agreement with the currently accepted value of e (see e.g. Ref. [34]).
               Combination        of experimental         results: a closer look            253


the likelihood still Gaussian,

                                                                     (di - /x)2
                 f(di | n, <Ji) =                     exp                                (11.4)
                                         / 2 7T<7<                      loi
but with a standard deviation which might differ from that quoted by the
experimentalists by a factor ri which is not exactly known:

                                                                                         (11.5)
                                                     Si

The uncertainty about r* can be described by a p.d.f. /(i-j). This uncer­
tainty changes the likelihood (11.4), as it can be evaluated by the proba­
bility rules:

                     f(di | AO = / f(di | n, n, s^ f{n) dn,                              (11.6)

with
                                                                       (dj -      ji)2
              f(di   \fi,ri,Si)      =                     exp                 2         (11.7)
                                             '2 7T Tj Si                 2rU
If one believes that all r^ are exactly one, i.e. / ( n ) = (5(r; — 1) Vi, the
standard combination rule is recovered. Because of our basic assumption of
democracy, the mathematical expression of the p.d.f. of r, will not depend
on i, therefore we shall talk hereafter, generically, about r and f(r).
    A solution to the problem of finding a parametrization of / ( r ) such
that this p.d.f. is acceptable to experienced physicists, even though the
integral (11.6) still has a closed form, has been proposed by Dose and von
der Linden [129]; an improved version of it will be used here. Following
Ref. [129], we choose initially the variable w = 1/r2 = s2/a2, and consider
it to be described by a gamma distribution:

                                               A^u/- 1
                                  /M =            T(S)
                                                                                         (11.8)

where A and S are the so-called scale and shape parameters, respectively.
As a function of these two parameters, expected value and variance of u>
are E(w) = 6/X and Var(w) = 6/X2. Using probability calculus we get the
p.d.f of r:
                                                                 2
                                             2XSr-(2S+l)e-\/r
                        f(r\\S)          =                                               (11.9)
254            Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical        introduction


where the parameters have been written explicitly as conditionands for the
probability distribution. Expected value and variance of r are:

                           EW = ^ i f c i z a                                          .
                                                                                     (n 10)
                                                                                     (11.10)

                                                                                     (11.11)

existing simultaneously if A > 0 and 8 > 1.
    The individual likelihood, integrated over the possible values of r, is
obtained by inserting Eqs. (11.7) and (11.9) in Eq. (11.6):


                                                                                     (11.12)

Using a uniform prior distribution for fi, and remembering that we are
dealing with independent results, we have finally:
                                          /     (t}.    _,/|2X    -(-5+1/2)
       f(»\d,s)Kf(d\s,riccl[(\+{                       '2gf   )               ,      (11.13)

where s = {si,S2,.. . , s n } . The normalization factor can be deter­
mined numerically. Equation (11.13) should be written, to be precise, as
f(fi\d,s,\,6), to remind us that the solution depends on the choice of A
and 8, and teaches us how to get a solution which takes into account all
reasonable choices of the parameters:

                   /(/i \d,s)=     //(/x | d, s, A, <J) /(A, 8) dXdS,                 (11.14)
                                                                                     (11.14)

where /(A, 8) quantifies the confidence on each possible pair of parameters. 3
    A natural constraint on the values of the parameters comes from the
request E(r) = 1, modelling the assumption that the cr's agree, on average,
with the stated uncertainties. The standard deviation of the distribution
gives another constraint. Conservative considerations suggest a(r)/E(r) «
0(1). The condition E(r) = a(r) = 1 is obtained for A « 0.6 and 8 «
1.3. The resulting p.d.f. of r is shown as the continuous line of Fig. 11.3.
One can see that the parametrization of f(r) corresponds qualitatively to
intuition: the barycenter of the distribution is 1; values below r « 1/2 are
considered practically impossible; on the other hand, very large values of r
   3
    A and S are the same for all experiments as we are modelling a democratic scepticism.
In general they could depend on the experiment, thus changing Eq. (11.13).
                Combination of experimental results: a closer look                    255


        1.6
        1.4
        1.2
           1
        0.8
        0.6
        0.4
        0.2

                    0.5        1       1.5        2       2.5        3


Fig. 11.3 Distribution of the rescaling factor r = ctrue/<7est u s i n g the
parametrizations of Eq. (11.9) for several values of the set of parameters (A, <5);
the solid line corresponds to what will be taken as the reference distribution in
this paper, yielding E(r) = a(r) = 1, and it is obtained for A « 0.6 and 5 « 1.3.
Dotted and dashed lines show the p.d.f. of r yielding a(r) = 0.5 and 1.5, respec­
tively.

are conceivable, although with very small probability, indicating that large
overlooked systematic errors might occur. Anyway, we feel that, besides
general arguments and considerations about the shape of f(r) (to which we
are not used), what matters is how reasonable the results look. Therefore,
the method has been tested with simulated data, shown in the left plots of
Fig. 11.4.
     For simplicity, all individual results are taken to have the same standard
deviation (note that the upper left plot of Fig. 11.4 shows the situation of
two identical results). The solid curve of the right-hand plots shows the
combined result obtained using Eq. (11.13) with A = 0.6 and S = 1.3,
yielding E(r) = a(r) = 1. For comparison, the dashed lines show also
the result obtained by the standard combination. The method described
here, with parameters chosen by general considerations, tends to behave
in qualitative agreement with the expected point of view of a sceptical
experienced physicist. As soon as the individual results start to disagree,
the combined distribution gets broader than the standard combination, and
might become multi-modal if the results cluster in several places. However,
if the agreement is somehow 'too good' (first and last case of Fig. 11.4) the
combined distribution becomes narrower than the standard result.
256           Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical introduction




Fig. 11.4 Examples of sceptical combination of results. The plots on the left-hand
side show the individual results (in the upper plot the two results coincide). The
plots on the right-hand side show the combined result obtained using Eq. (11.13)
with the constraint E(r) = a(r) = 1 (continuous lines), compared with the stan­
dard combination (dashed lines).
                              Combination of experimental results: a closer look                                                                                                              257




   Eq. (11.13), A = 1.4 and S = 2.1                                                    Eq. (11.13), A = 0.4 and 6 = 1.1
             [a(r) = 0.5]                                                                        [a(r) = 1.5]
                                             10                                                                                             10


                                               8                                                                                            k
                                          /6                                                                                            16
                                         If        \\                                                                                             \\
                                              4
                                    I                                                                                                                 V
                                                                                                                         ////
                                                                                                                            7                4
                                                                                                                                                       \\\ \
                                              2                                                                        '7                   2            \\ \ \
                          >'/
      0.7         0.8         0.9                        1.1         1.2         1.3     0.7         0.8               0.9                                 1.1              1.2         1.3


                                               6                                                                                             6


                                              k    \                                                                                              \
                                            jf 4



                                    /
                                        /     3

                                               2
                                                                                                                                II
                                                                                                                               It
                                                                                                                                   f3        2
                                                                                                                                                      \

                                                         \                                                                                                \\
                                                                                                                       Jf
            0.6           0.8                                1.2           1.4                 0.6                 0.8                                        1.2                 1.4


                                               6                                                                                             6
                                                                                                                                               \
                                                   \                                                                                            \
                                                                                                                                                 \
                                            ; 4
                                                   \                                                                                    I    4
                                                                                                                                                  \
                                        / 3 \\\                                                                                                    \
                                                                                                                       /\ '                            V            \
                              / ;                        \\ \\                                                 /
                                                                                                                   /               *V I
                                                                                                                                                          \             \
                                                                                                     ^ /
                                                                                                           /                f
                                                                                                                              /'
            0.6           0.8                                1.2           1.4                 0.6                 0.8                                        1.2                 1.4




                                                                                                                   8


                          6                                                                                        6


                         4                                                                                         4




      0.6     0.8
                         2
                              A[
                                        1.2

                                             14
                                                   Y\
                                                   1.4        1.6     1.8         2      0.6     0.8
                                                                                                           ;           \i 1A        1.2

                                                                                                                                        Id
                                                                                                                                                  1.4          1.6           1.8         2



                                             12                                                                                             13*

                                             10                                                                                             10


                                         If'
                                            /e                                                                                          /8        -A
                                        I' 6                                                                                        I        6



                                7              4                                                                                   //
                                             2                                                                                //             4
                          '/                                                                                       /J                       2
      0.8               0.9                                    1.1               1.2     0.8               0.9                                                    1.1                   1.2




Fig. 11.5 Combination of results obtained by varying the parameters of the scep­
tical combination, in order to hold E(r) to one and change <r(r) by ±50%.
258          Bayesian    reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction




                                         10

                                          8




             0.7        0.8     0.9                1.1      1.2        1.3


Fig. 11.6 Sceptical perception of a single measurement having a standard devi­
ation equivalent to the standard combination of the top of Fig. 11.4. Note how
the result differs from the combination of the individual results.


    In order to get a feeling about the sensitivity of the results from the
choice of the parameters, two other sets of parameters have been tried,
keeping the requirement E(r) = 1, but varying a(r) by ±50 %: a(r) = 0.5 is
obtained for A m 1.4 and 5 « 2.1; a(r) = 1.5 is obtained for A sa 0.4 and 8 m
1.1. The resulting p.d.f.'s of r are shown in Fig. 11.3. The results obtained
using these two sets of parameters on the simulated data of Fig. 11.4 are
shown in Fig. 11.5. We see that> indeed, the choice E(r) = a(r) = 1 seems
to be an optimum, and the ±50% variations of a(r) give results which are
at the edge of what one would consider to be acceptable. Therefore, we
shall take the parameters providing E(r) = a(r) = 1 as the reference ones.
    Another interesting feature of Eq. (11.13) is its behavior for a single
experimental result, as shown in Fig. 11.6. For comparison, we have taken
a result having a stated standard deviation equal to \jy/2 of each of those
of Fig. 11.4. Figure 11.6 has to be compared with the upper right plots
of Fig. 11.4. The sceptical combination takes much more seriously two
independent experiments, each reporting in an uncertainty a, than a sin­
gle experiment performing a/y/2. On the contrary, the two situations are
absolutely equivalent in the standard combination rule. In particular, the
tails of the p.d.f. obtained by the sceptical combination vanish more slowly
than in the Gaussian case, while the belief in the central value is higher.
The result models the qualitative attitude of sceptical physicists, accord­
ing to whom a single experiment is never enough to establish a value, no
                Combination   of experimental                    results: a closer look        259




               0.14                                    <\

               0.12                                   l\
                0.1
                                                     y/'
               0.08

               0.06
                                                     t\ ^
                                                     /:"'/
                                                     / '?
                                     '■■■•''   / (
               0.04                                          •    l
                                                                      \ \ ' ■



                              .••'        /.//
               0.0-2
                                                     :<""                \ ^^j**
         -10                  10                     20                    30      40     50


Fig. 11.7 Individual results compared with the standard combination (grey
dashed), the PDG-rescaled combination (solid thin) and the sceptical combina­
tion as described in this paper (solid thick).

matter how precise the result may be, although the true value might have
more chance to be within one standard deviation than the probability level
calculated from a Gaussian distribution.


11.3.1    Application     to e'/e
The combination rule based on Eq. (11.13) has been applied to the results
about Re(e'/e) shown in Tab. 11.1. As discussed above, our reference pa­
rameters are A = 0.6 and 5 = 1.3, corresponding to E(r) as cr(r) « 1. The
resulting p.d.f. for e = Re(e'/e) x 104 is shown as the thick continuous
line of Fig. 11.7, together with the individual results (dotted lines). For
comparison, we also give the result obtained using the combination rules
commonly applied in particle physics. The grey-dashed line of Fig. 11.7 is
obtained with the standard combination rule [Eqs. (11.1) and (11.2)]. The
thin continuous line has been evaluated using the PDG 'prescription' [79].
According to this rule, the standard deviation (11.2) is enlarged by a factor
given by ^x2/(N     - 1), where \2 is the chi-2 of the data with respect to
the average (11.1) and N is the number of independent results.
    We see that although the PDG rule gives a distribution wider than that
obtained by the standard rule, the barycenters of the distributions coincide,
thus not taking into account that one of the results is quite far from where
260          Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


       Table 11.2   Comparison of the different methods of combining the re­
       sults.

         Combination     Mean      a    Median    Mode     P[Re(e'/e   < 0)]

                                                               5 x 10-15
           Standard       21.4    2.7     21.4     21.4

                                                               5 x 10"8
         PDG rule [79]    21.4    4.0     21.4     21.4

                                                               1.5 x 10~ 6
           Sceptical      22.7    3.5     23.0     23.5




the others seem to cluster. Moreover, the p.d.f. is assumed to be Gaussian,
independently of the configuration of experimental points. Instead, the
sceptical combination takes into account better the configuration of the
data points. The peak of the distribution is essentially determined by the
three results which appear more consistent with each other. Nevertheless,
there is a more pronounced tail for small values of Re(e'/e), to take into
account that there is indeed a result providing evidence in that region, and
that cannot be ignored.
    A quantitative comparison of the different methods is given in Tab. 11.2,
where the most relevant statistical summaries are provided, together with
some probability intervals. It is worth recalling that each of these sum­
maries gives some information about the distribution, but, when the uncer­
tainty of this result has to be finally propagated into other results (together
with other uncertainties), it is the average and standard deviation which
matter. The standard 'error propagation' is based on linearization, on the
property of expected value and variance under a linear combination and
on central limit theory (the result of several contributions will be roughly
Gaussian). Therefore, propagating mode (or median) and 68% probabil­
ity intervals does not make any sense, unless the input distributions are
Gaussian.
    An interesting comparison is given by the probability that Re(e'/e) is
negative. The sceptical combination gives the largest value, but still at the
level of one part per million, indicating that, even in this conservative anal­
ysis, a positive value of the direct CP violation parameter was 'practically'
established already with those measurements.
    The sensitivity of the result on the parameters of the combination for­
mula can be inferred from Fig. 11.8, where the results obtained changing
a(r) by ±50% are shown. The combined result is quite stable. This is
particularly true if one remembers that these extreme values of parameters
                Combination of experimental results: a closer look                         261



             0.14
                                                 I      A
             0.12
                                             1
                                                        7
              0.1                           1         .7
                                                            \ \
                                        I        //
            0.08                                             \ \\
             0.06
                                      / ./                            •\
                                  1
             0.04                      1
                                                                  \
             0.02            Ay                                       %
                                                                           N
                                                                               Ns^_
                    10      15                  20           25                30     35



Fig. 11.8 Dependence of the sceptical combination on the choice of the parame­
ters. Continuous, dotted and dashed lines are, respectively: A = 0.6 and 5 = 1.3
[o-(r-) = 1)]; A = 0.4 and S = 1.1 [a{r) = 0.5)]; A = 1.4 and 5 = 2.1 [a(r) = 0.5)].
The grey-dashed line gives, for comparison, the result of the standard combina­
tion.

are quite at the edge of what one would accept as reasonable, as can be
seen in Fig. 11.5. Note that if one would like to combine the results taking
also into account the uncertainty about the parameters, one would apply
Eq. (11.14). It is reasonable to think that, since the variations of the p.d.f.
from that obtained for the reference value of the parameters are not very
large, the p.d.f. obtained as weighted average over all the possibilities will
not be much different from the reference one.
    Figure 11.9 shows the results subdivided into CERN and Fermilab. In
these cases the difference between the standard combination and the scep­
tical combination becomes larger, and, again, the outcome of the sceptical
combination follows qualitatively the intuitive one of experienced physi­
cists. The sceptical combination of the CERN results alone is better than
that given by the standard one, thus reproducing formally the instinctive
suspicion that the uncertainties could have been overestimated. For the
Fermilab ones the situation is reversed. In any case, both partial com­
binations tend to establish strongly the picture of a positive and sizeable
Re(e'/e) value. Finally, note that the ±50% variations in a(r) produce in
the partial combinations a larger effect (although not relevant for the con­
clusions) than in the overall combination. This is due to the fact that the
variations produce opposite effects on the two subsets of data in the region
of Re(e'/e) around 20 x 10" 4 .
262           Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical introduction


            0.14

            0.12

             0.1

            0.08
                                                              r                    \
            0.06

            0.04                                        il                               V.s
                                            / :J
            0.02
                                  " -'J/^
                                                                                                           p
                                 10                               20                            30    40


            0.14

            0.12                                                     / "■>

                                                                                           r
             0.1

            0.08                                                                         rv
            0.06                                              '              ■ • ' ' /
                                                                                               '• \
                                                                       / Il
            0.04
                                          . . - ■ ' '     _
            0.02                                              ^•^s


                                 10                               20                            30    40




Fig. 11.9 Sceptical combination of CERN and Fermilab results (upper and lower
plot, respectively). The continuous line shows the result obtained by Eq. (11.13)
and reference parameters. The dashed and dotted lines are the results obtained
by varying the standard deviation of r = a js by +50% and —50%, respectively.
The grey-dashed line shows the results obtained by the standard combination
rule.

11.3.2    Posterior        evaluation                    of &i

An interesting by-product of the m e t h o d illustrated above is the posterior
evaluation of the various CTi, or, equivalently, of the various r;. Again, we
can make use of Bayes' theorem, obtaining

                                                        f(d\r,s,/j,)fa(r\s,n)
                   f(r\d,s,ii)        =                                                                        (11.15)
                                            Jf(d\r,s,n)f0{r\s,fi)dr                                   '

where r = {r\,r2,..       ■ ,rn}. Since the initial status of knowledge is such
t h a t values of ri are independent of each other, and they are independent
               Combination       of experimental          results: a closer look                         263


of // and s, we obtain
                                                                             2A'rr(am)e-V'-?
/„(r |«,/i) = /0(r) = HMn) = Hfin I \,6) = n
                                                                                        T(S)
                                                                    (11.16)
having used Eq. (11.9). As a shorthand for Eq. (11.16), we shall write in
the following simply f0(r) = Ylt Uin).
    Since the experimental results are also considered independent, we can
rewrite Eq. (11.15) as
                                          Uif(di\ri,Si,n)f0(ri)
                f(r\d,s,fj,)       =
                                        IUif(di\ri,Si,n)fo(ri)dr
                                              Uif(di\ri,Si,fi)fo(ri)
                                                                                                   (11.17)
                                        Ui ff(di         \ri,Si,fi) f0(n) drt
The marginal distribution of each r;, still conditioned by fi (and, obviously,
by the experimental values), is obtained by integrating f(r \ d, s, n) over all
rj, with j ^ i. As a result, we obtain
                                                 f(di\ri,Si,n)f0(n)
                 f{n\d,s,n)            =                                                           (11.18)
                                              ff(di\ri,Si,n)f0(ri)dri
Making use of Eqs. (11.7), (11.9) and (11.12) we get:

                                   I
                               / 2 7T T{ Si   exp         2r?»     I            r((5)
        f(n | d, s, fj.) =
                                                                            a      (<5+1/2)
                                   _Af_ r ( i + i / 2 )     /\     (di-/.) \

                                                                                                   (11.19)
The final result is obtained by eliminating, in the usual way, the condition
H, i.e.

                 f(n \d,a)=             ff(n        | d, s, IA) / ( / i | d, s) d/x .              (11.20)

Making use of Eq. (11.13), and neglecting in Eq. (11.19) all factors not
depending on r» and fi, we get the unnormalized result
  /(r,KS)ocrr(25+2>e-V^
                                                                                              -(5+1/2)
                                                                          (<*j-/*) 2
                             exp              2r252         n *+                2 s2

                                                                                                   (11.21)
264             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical          introduction


This formula is clearly valid for n > 2. If this is not the case, the product
over j ^ i is replaced by unity, and the integral is proportional to rj.
Equation (11.21) then becomes f(ri\di,si)        oc Tj      ' e~x/Tl, i.e. we
have recovered the initial distribution (11.9). In fact, if we have only one
data point, there is no reason to change our beliefs about r. Only the
comparison with other results can induce us to change our opinion.
    Once we have got /(r* | d, s) we can give posterior estimates of r; in
terms of average and standard deviations, and they can be compared with
the prior assumption E(r) = a(r) = 1, to understand which uncertainties
have been implicitly rescaled by the sceptical combination.4 Convenient
formulae to evaluate numerically first and second moments of the posterior
distribution of r, are given by

                                                 .1/2                            (*+l/2)
                                                   x+ii              6
   Efa)
                 T(5)         s{*+W'M                        £f)x ->>
                                                                   (* l/2)
              T{8 +1/2)                                 (d      )3       +
                                          /n,(A+^f)                            d/x
                                                                                        (11.22)
                                                                             (■5+1/2)
              r ( *-i/2) J(A + ^ ) n j ( A + ^ # ) —                                    d,
   E(r?)
              T(8 + 1/2)
                                       m, (A+ ^gf )-""'"*.
                                                                                        (11.23)

Note that, since [].•(• • •) °^ ^ n e integrands are proportional to /(/i | d, s),
Eqs. (11.22)-(11.23) can be written in the compact form

                               T(6)
                 E(n) =                   ■Eu      A+                                   (11.24)
                            T(5 +1/2)                          2,?
                             r^-i/2)                    (rf,-M) 2 1
                 M r J                       p   A+                                     (11.25)
                         ~ r ( 5 + i/2)                      2 s?

where EM(-) indicates expected values over the p.d.f. of /x.
    At this point it is important to anticipate the objection of those who
think that it is incorrect to infer n + 1 quantities (fi and r) starting from
n data points. Indeed, there is nothing wrong in doing so. But, obviously,
the results are correlated, and they depend also on the prior distribution
   4
     Note that it is incorrect to feed again into the procedure the rescaled uncertainties, as
they come from this analysis. The procedure has already taken into account all possible
rescaling factors in the evaluation of / ( / i j d, s).
                   Combination    of experimental    results: a closer look                     265




Fig. 11.10 F i n a l distributions of r corresponding t o t h e four m o s t precise results
on R e ( e ' / e ) , c o m p a r e d w i t h t h e reference prior one (grey line). T h e continuous
lines refer t o t h e C E R N results, d o t t e d lines t o t h e Fermilab ones.


of ri, which acts as a constraint. In fact we have seen above that for n = 1
the result on r is trivial.
    Figure 11.10 gives the final distributions of ri = (Ji/si for the four
most precise determinations of Re(e'/e), compared with the reference initial
distribution having a{r) = 1 (grey line in the plot). The distributions
relative to the CERN results are shown with continuous lines, the Fermilab
ones by dots. In particular, the one that has a substantial probability mass
above 1 is the 1993 E731 result. Average and standard deviations of the
distributions are given in Tab. 11.3, also showing the values that one would
obtain with the other sets of parameters that we have considered to be edge
ones.
    Once more, the results are in qualitative agreement with intuition: The

     Table 11.3 Posterior estimation of r = ai/si starting from identical priors
     having E 0 ( r ) = 1 and aa(r) ■= 0.5, 1.0 and 1.5. The individual results are given
     by di ± Si to be consistent with the notation used throughout this section (see
     Ref. [127] for details and references) .
            Experiment             di ± Si               Posterior E(r-j) (<x( n))
                                                o-o(r) = 0 . 5 ffo(r) = 1 <r0(r) = 1.5
       E731 (1988)                 32 ± 3 0       0.9 (0.4)     0.8 (0.5)        0.7 (0.5)
       E731 (1993)                7.4 ± 5 . 9     1.6 (0.7)     1.9 (1.2)        2.1 (1.5)
       NA31 (1988+1993)          23.0 ± 6 . 5     0.9 (0.4)     0.8 (0.5)        0.8 (0.6)
       KTeV (1999)               28.0 ± 4 . 1     1.2 (0.6)     1.2 (0.9)        1.2 (1.0)
       NA48 (1999)               18.5 ± 7 . 3     0.9 (0.4)     0.9 (0.5)        0.9 (0.6)
266          Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


CERN curves are slightly squeezed below r = 1, as the uncertainty evalua­
tion seems to be a bit conservative. The Fermilab ones show instead some
drift towards large r. In particular, figure and table make one suspect that
some contribution to the error has been overlooked in the E731 data. Note
that in this case the average value of the rescaling factor is smaller than
one could expect from alternative procedures which require the overall x 2
to equal the number of degrees of freedom. The reason is the shape of the
initial distribution of r, which protects us against unexpectedly large values
of the rescaling factors.
                              Chapter 12

        Asymmetric uncertainties and
           nonlinear propagation


                                      "Two and two equal four. The trouble is,
                               in that world of shadows and distorting mirrors
                                 what may or may not appear to be two, when
                           multiplied by a factor that may or may not be two,
                       could possibly come out at four but probably will not."
                                         (Frederick Forsyth - The fist of God)




Measurement results are frequently published in the form

                             best value _ A + .

It is interesting to try to understand how experimentalists arrive at these
asymmetric uncertainties and how this information is commonly used in
subsequent analyses. We shall see that the present practice is far from
being acceptable and, indeed, could bias the value of important physics
quantities. The alternative is, of course, to use Bayesian reasoning. The
general strategy is briefly outlined and some approximate formulae, useful
for avoiding complex calculations, are derived.


12.1   Usual combination of 'statistic and systematic errors'

The combination in quadrature of uncertainties due to systematic effects
has become quite standard practice in physics. It is also common prac­
tice to add these uncertainties in quadrature to those from random ef­
fects ('statistic and systematic errors', in physics jargon — see remarks
in Sec. 5.1). Usually the two kinds of uncertainties are given separately,
and the systematic-effect uncertainties are listed individually (at least for

                                     267
268            Bayesian   reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


the most relevant ones) in order to show the potential of further measure­
ments made with the same apparatus. This combination rule has arisen
as a kind of pragmatic procedure [30], in analogy to the combination of
standard deviations in probability theory, although cannot justifiably be
termed within 'conventional' statistics. The same is true for the use of the
covariance matrix to handle correlated uncertainties.
     There is less agreement when the uncertainties due to systematic ef­
fects are asymmetric and/or they produce asymmetric shifts in the final
quantity of interest due to nonlinear propagation of uncertainty. As a nu­
merical example of the latter case, take a quantity Y depending on three
'influence quantities' Xi, X2 and X3, which could be calibration constants,
environment quantities or theoretical parameters. Suppose that, for the ref­
erence values of the X's, the analysis procedure gives (in arbitrary units)
Y = 1.000 ± 0.050, where the uncertainty associated with the result is
that due to random effects (in this chapter a notation different from that
of Chapter 8 is used, to come closer to what the reader is familiar when
dealing with uncertainty propagation problems). Consider now that by
'varying reasonably the quantities JQ' (the expression is intentionally left
vague for the moment) the following deviations from the central values oc­
cur: AY 1± = ±°0fg°0, AY2± = ±g;°»?, and AF 3 ± = t^ise- An often-used
practice 1 is to combine in quadrature separately positive and negative de­
viations, obtaining the following result: Y = 1.00 ±0.05 (stat.) t o 23 ( svst -)>
subsequently summarized as Y = l.OOt.oW-
     Now we are faced with the problem that the result of this ad hoc proce­
dure has no theoretical justification. Hence the uncertainty content of the
statement (i.e. its probabilistic meaning) is unclear and, as a consequence,
it is not obvious how to make use of this information in further analyses,
even in the simple case in which the data points are uncorrelated. As a
matter of fact, most people remove the asymmetry in further analysis of
the results, getting something equivalent to a standard deviation to be used
in x2 fits- This 'standard deviation' is evaluated either by taking the largest
value between A+ and A_, or by averaging the two values (some use the
arithmetic, others the geometric average). The result is that in both pro­
cedures the uncertainty is symmetrized and the result is considered as if it
were described, for all practical purposes, by a Gaussian model around the
published best estimate. 2
   1
     There is also who combines left and right deviations linearly, obtaining for this
example Y = 1.00 ± 0.05 (stat.) t°'ll (syst.).
   2
     A more complicated 'prescription' is described by the PDG[79], which we report
               Asymmetric   uncertainties   and nonlinear   propagation              269


    The main worry is not that the combined uncertainties will be incorrect
(we anticipate that the arithmetic average of A + and A_ gives indeed
the correct uncertainty in most cases of practical interest), but rather that
the result itself can be biased with respect to what one could get using
consistently the best knowledge concerning the input quantities, as will be
shown in the sequel.


12.2     Sources of asymmetric uncertainties in standard sta­
         tistical procedures

12.2.1     Asymmetric        %2 and 'A%2 = 1 rule'
We saw in Sec. 8.1 that minimum x 2 fits can be considered special cases of
Bayesian methods. In particular, if the final distribution is approximately
(multivariate-) Gaussian, i.e. the x 2 function is parabolic around its min­
imum, the covariance matrix of the parameter can be evaluated from the
curvature of the function (the "Hessian"). Under the same hypotheses,
the "Ax 2 = 1" rule holds [and the equivalent " A l n £ = 1/2" rule, due
to Eq. (8.3)]. But in real life, more complicated situations can happen, as
shown in the one-dimensional examples of Fig. 12.1.

  • If the x 2 is perfectly parabolic (Fig. 12.1, frame 1A) the final distribu­
    tion, proportional to exp[—x2/2] is Gaussian (frame IB). The Ax 2 = 1
    rule and Hessian provide the standard deviation to be associated to
    the uncertainty about /i, and define a 68% probability interval (which
    we could also call 'confidence interval', in the sense that we are 68%
    confident that /i is inside it).
  • In the case of 'minimal deviation from a parabola' (Fig. 12.1, frame
    2A) the Ax 2 = 1 rule and Hessian give different results. The practice
    is to prefer the asymmetric result provided by Ax 2 = 1 rule, 5 ^ m
    this           that which provides a 68% probability around the 'best
here for the convenience of the reader: "When experimenters quote asymmetric errors
(8x)+ and (Sx)~ for a measurement x, the error that we use for that measurement in
making an average or a fit with other measurements is a continuous function of these
three quantities.   When the resultant average or fit x is less than x — (5x)~, we use
(Sx)~; when it is greater than x + (5x)+, we use (Sx)+. In between, the error we use
is a linear function of x. Since the errors we use are functions of the result, we iterate
to get the final result. Asymmetric output errors are determined from the input errors
assuming a linear relation between the input and the output quantities." This rule does
not seem to be applied by others than the P D G . As examples of other ad hoc procedures,
see Refs. [131,132,133].
270                    Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical introduction




                                                                                          0.4                                                 IB)
      X2                                                         /           1A)
  4                                                                                             f(f)
                                                                                          0.3
  3                                                                                                              /    68%   \
                                                                                                                                          E[;u]-5.0
                                                                                          0.2                                             CT(H)=1.0
                             \       1   (       1       /           X2 n l „ + 1
  2
                                                                                          0.1
  1
                                                                                    V                                               \ ^             U
               2                 4                   6                   8           10                2         4          6             8          10



                                                                                          0.4                                                 2B)
      X2 \                                                       /           2A)
  4                                                                                             f(K)
                                                                                          0.3
  3                                                                                                                                       E[^]=4.2
                                 2               1                                        0.2                                             a(^)=1.5
  2                \                                 /               X2„ l n + 1                             /       68%    \

                                                                                          0.1
  1
                                                                                    M                                               ^V_             |U
               2                 4                   6                   8          10                 2         4          6             8           10



                                                                                          0.4                                                 3E)
      X2                                                                     3A)
  4                                                                                             f(K)
                                                                                          0.3
                                                                                                                      28% A
  3                                                                                                                                       E[;u]=4.3
                   ■*■—          3.5                 -                                    0.2                                             a(n)=1.5
                                                             /       X2min   + 1
  2
                                                                                                                     82%        1
                                                                                          0.1
  1
                                       0.7           '           0.4
                                                                                                                                                    (J

               2                 4                   6                   8          10                 2         4          6             8          10



                                                                                          0.4                                                 4B)
      X2                                                     /               4A)
  4                                                                                             f(K>
                                                                                          0.3
  3                                                                                                                                       E[/7]=2.9
           2           2.4                   /                       X2„ l n + 1          0.2                                             CT(H)=1.9
  2
                                                                                                       80%
                                                                                          0.1
  1
                                                                                    V                                               ~^—_            ^
               2                 4                   6                   8           10                2         4          6             8          10




Fig. 12.1 Some common shapes of \ 2 functions. Results based on the Xmin + 1
'prescription' are compared with final p.d.f.'s based on uniform prior, i.e.
f(/j, | data) oc exp[—x 2 /2].
                Asymmetric     uncertainties    and nonlinear   propagation             271


     estimate' of /j,. The usual justification is that one might think of a
     monotonic transformation fi —> / / , such that the \ 2 1S parabolic in / /
     and the Ax 2 (//) = 1 rule defines a 68% probability interval (assuming a
     uniform prior in / / ! ) . Then, since probability intervals are maintained
     in monotonic transformations, the condition A X 2 ( M ' ) = 1 defines a
     probability interval for /J, too. Some comments on this prescription are
     in order.
     - The Bayesian analysis (Fig. 12.1, frame 2B) provides the same 68%
       probability interval, but without having to swap the variable of inter­
       est \i with a virtual one, and having to assume, implicitly or explic­
       itly, a uniform prior on this 'mythical' fi'.3 The standard deviation
       is in general different from the A ± that result from the A\2 = 1
       rule.
     — The Ax 2 = 1 rule does not provide expected value and standard
       deviation of the quantity of interest, but only a 'best value' (coin­
       ciding with the mode) and asymmetric uncertainty. The problem is
       that this best value is not suitable for subsequent propagations of
       uncertainty, as already discussed in Sec. 12.1.
  • When the x 2 function becomes a bit more complicated,4 like in the ex­
    amples of Fig. 12.1, frames 3A and 4A, the reasoning based on the swap­
    ping of variables also fails, Hessian and Ax' = 1 rule results diverge
    3
      Prequentists will complain that "the procedure does not yield a probability interval"
but a "confidence interval", that "they do not use priors", and so on (and that I have
never understood their methods, which is in some sense true, since they have 'no mean­
ing'...). My intention is to review the results of their methods, trying to understand
when and why they are reasonable.
    4
      When systematic effects, too, are included 'ad hoc' and 'minimum x 2 fits' are per­
formed minimizing objects which have little to do with the x 2 0 I probability theory, the
situation becomes surreal, like in the cases of the following table, [134] which shows A x 2
rule arbitrarily modified to obtain the desired result:

        Collaboration         Rule             Value of cts (adimensional)
          CTEQ6           A x 2 = 100          0.1165 ±0.0065
            ZEUS          **lSI = 50           0.1166 ± 0.0008(uncor) ± 0.0032(corr)
                                                      ±0.0036(norm) ± 0.0018(model)
            MRST             A x 2 = 20        0.119 ± 0.002(exp) ± 0.003(theory)
             HI              AX2 = 1           0.115 ± 0.0017(exp) ± 0.005(theory)

(as is the QCD coupling constant, evaluated at the Z° mass square scale). As the
authors of Ref. [134] remark, "The values obtained are consistent, and the errors not
too dissimilar given the wide variation in A x 2 used. This is largely because each group
has chosen a method which gives a reasonable and believable error." No further comment
is needed to emphasize how 'objective' many non-subjective methods can be.
272             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical      introduction


       and the latter can have multiple solutions. Essentially, the numbers
       resulting from these rules lose any unequivocal and reasonable proba­
       bilistic meaning. Instead, we can see that the Bayesian approach still
       provides acceptable and consistent results (see frames 3B and 4B), not
       dominated by local minima or numerical fluctuations, of clear meaning
       and valid under well stated conditions.


12.2.2      Systematic       effects
The source of asymmetry described in the previous sub-section is related
to what is usually defined as 'statistical analysis'. Others arise when from
systematic effects are taken into account, typically in the following way.
Variations are applied to the values of physics, simulation and analysis
parameters. Deviations from the nominal result are registered and used to
assess the 'systematic error'. Needless to say, this procedure requires much
"scientific judgment" 5 [5], and I think that reasoning in terms of ISO type
B uncertainty would help a lot (see Chapter 8). Let us see what is done in
practice and what are the potential problems.
    Before going into details, let me make a general comment. Without
guidance of the kind provided by the ISO recommendations, or more in
general by subjective probability, there is no common agreement on what
these variations should mean (which is a different problem from 'what they
really are' 6 ) . Sometimes they are just one standard deviation (when the
   5
      A related problem, which also requires much subjective commitment by the ex­
perimentalists is when to stop making systematic checks and adding contributions to
the overall uncertainty. As eloquently said [135], "one could correlate a particle physics
result with the phase of the Moon or the position of Jupiter, and find most likely no
significant effect, with some uncertainty; but certainly we don't want to take care of this
uncertainty."    (But if you are patient enough searching, you can also find 'significative'
effects. . . ) Only contributions which are in principle relevant should be considered in
the uncertainty evaluation. Even if the effect is 'statistically significant', one should try
to understand if it can physically influence the result, before including it in the list of
contribution to the overall uncertainty.
    6
      To make this distinction clear, think of the following example. If somebody quotes
a 50% probability interval for a parameter, I will take this information to be what that
person believes. Perhaps other experts would quote different intervals at the same proba­
bility level, but this is not a problem. At least I have got the information that somebody
I trust has expressed that degree of confidence. The real problem comes when I get a
number and nobody tells me what meaning he attaches to the number., When somebody
tells me that me that this is a frequentistic CL I really don't know what to think, unless
I analyze in detail the procedure used. In fact, I know by experience that sometimes
they are equivalent, under reasonable but unstated hypotheses, to probabilities. But
other times, almost always when results for search of rare phenomena are reported, they
               Asymmetric   uncertainties   and nonlinear propagation          273


information about that parameter comes from a 'statistical method') some­
times they mean a kind of maximum conceivable variations, other times
they are just intervals of "high probability". In other cases they are ±50%
variations of the nominal value, or a 'factor-of-two' variation (i.e. x2 and
xl/2).

12.2.2.1   Asymmetric beliefs on systematic effects
A direct asymmetry in the systematic effect comes when the interval in
which the parameter could be is assessed in a non-symmetric way around
the best estimate. For example, the parameter of a theory could have more
chance of being larger than/smaller than the 'accepted' reference value.
Often this happens because that parameter produces nonlinear (e.g. log­
arithmic) effects to the observables which depend on it. We have already
given in Sec. 8.10 the example of a calibration constant believed to be
l-0lto'o- Also 'factor of two' variations of parameters produce asymmetric
uncertainty ( a ^ / 2 ' where a is the nominal value).

12.2.2.2   Nonlinear propagation of uncertainties
The most common source of asymmetric uncertainty due to systematics is
nonlinear dependence of the true value Y on the influence quantity Xi. In
fact, the procedure of obtaining AY± deviations of the output value from
± AX; of the input value is nothing but a numerical estimate of the deriva­
tive dY/dXi around E(X). Nonlinearity makes AV_ differ from AY+.
Some examples are given in Fig. 12.2 for the generic input variables Xi and
output variables Yi.


12.3    General solution of the problem

From a Bayesian perspective, the solution is in principle simple: model
the probability functions of all quantities of interest and apply probability
theory to propagate the uncertainty of each input quantity into the output
quantities. Some useful p.d.f.'s to model uncertainty on input quantities
are shown in Fig. 8.1, while Fig. 12.2 shows how some of these p.d.f.'s
are transformed by a nonlinear propagation. Figure 12.3 shows another
example of uncertainty propagations, based on the variables Xi and Yi of
are not. An important physics case (the dreamed Higgs particle!) in which the same
experimental teams report 95% CL upper and lower limits which do not have the same
limit is reported in Ref. [59].
274              Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical introduction




      -4    -2                 2       4         -4      -2               2     4




                               2       4




                               2       4         -4      -2




Fig. 12.2 Propagation of uniform, triangular and Gaussian distribution under a
nonlinear transformation. f{Yi) were obtained analytically using Eq. (4.95).
                  Asymmetric      uncertainties   and nonlinear      propagation                     275




Fig. 12.3 P r o b a b i l i t y density functions of t h e s u m of t h e q u a n t i t i e s Xi a n d of
their nonlinear t r a n s f o r m a t i o n s YJ defined in Fig. 12.2.


Fig. 12.2. In all these examples analytical calculations have been performed.
In many practical cases the computational part can be challenging and
Monte Carlo methods are used — but this is just a technical detail. 7
    The result will be given by the joint p.d.f. of all final quantities, and can
be summarized with the usual statistics objects: expected value, standard
deviation, mode, median, probability intervals, and so on. In particular, an
important summary is the correlation matrix if several output quantities
are involved. It is important to stress, once more in this text, the most im­
portant objects for further propagations of uncertainty are expected value,
standard deviation and correlation matrix. In fact, there is no simple rule
for the combination of the mode and probability intervals, as discussed in
Sec. 4.4 (see in particular Fig. 4.3).


12.4      A p p r o x i m a t e solution

We have already seen in Chapters 4 and 8 that the approximate solution
of uncertainty propagation, and hence of treatment of uncertainty due to
systematic effects, is achieved via linearization. When nonlinear effects
are sizable, at least second order approximation has to be considered. In
this section, we first review the linear approximation and then analyze
the second order approximation. The first part follows what was done in
    In my opinion, many papers place too much emphasis on the details of the Monte
Carlo, instead of telling in simpler words what the aim was. In many cases, it would be
enough to state that "the integral has been done by Monte Carlo". Similarly, I note a
misuse of the expression 'getanken experiment' (of nobler origin) just to refer to these
technicalities, i.e. to say that a likelihood, meant as response of the apparatus, has been
estimated by Monte Carlo.
276          Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical       introduction


Sec. 8.6, but with more details and a different notation, close to that of
Sec. 4.4.


12.4.1    Linear   expansion         around        E(X)
Let us call Xi and Yj the input and output variables, respectively, and with
X and Y their ensemble. X and Y are related by functions Yj = Yj(X).
The first-order expansion of Yi(X) around the expected values of Xi gives
                                             ay.
                                                           {Xi - E[Xt})           (12.1)
               YiKYmxv+Ytitih.dXi                   E[X]

                       +                      Xi,                                 (12.2)
                           ^     dXi E[X]

where the derivatives are evaluated for x = E(X) (this will be implicit
hereafter). The second formula is very convenient to calculate the variance,
having put in k all terms which do not contain Xi. Evaluating the expected
values from Eq. (12.1), and variances and covariances from Eq. (12.2), we
get (the symbol ' « ' has been replaced by ' = ' to indicate that there are no
further approximations other than linearization):

               E(Yj) = Yj(E[X}),                                                  (12.3)
                                         2

              ^«) = E ( g ) ■* +
                           2
                               E ( H ) (dX^
                                          n
                                            )W~\                                  (12-4)
                               l<m




where cr, are shorthand for a(Xi) and pim are the correlation coefficients
between Xi and Xm. The terms within {■} vanish if the input quantities
are uncorrelated, as is often the case when relevant systematic effects are
considered.
    In complex real-life cases the derivatives are not performed analytically.
Instead, the effects of the input values on the output values are evaluated
               Asymmetric   uncertainties   and nonlinear        propagation             277


numerically, often by Monte Carlo techniques by ±Aa;j variations around
the 'best estimates'. In order to obtain sensible approximate formulae, it
is convenient to take Axi = Oi and to consider the variation around the
expected value. Calling 8 A± i ; the variation of Yj due to a variation of Xi
of dblcTj around E[X;], linearity implies that


                               OAi          Oi         Gi

Since in the linear approximation A+ji and A_ j ; are practically equal, we
call either of them Aji (taking the average of the two if there are small
differences; the case of large differences, a hint that there are nonlinear
effects, will be discussed in the next section). We get, finally, the following
practical formulae for the elements of the covariance matrix:


                  O3(Yj) = l > i < + { 2 £ #"• A * A>™ f '                            <127)
                               i              K. Km                      )

            Cov(Yj,Yk) = Y, &H Aki + hj2                        Pim Ajj Akm I .      (12.8)
                               i                 \     Km                      )

In the simple case of independent input quantities, Eqs. (12.7)-(12.8) reduce
to

                  <7 2 (^) = £ A £                                                   (12.9)
                               i
            Cov(y,-,rfc) = £A j i A i f e i                                         (12.10)
                               i

                            = J2c°MYj,Yk)             =J2Siik        \Aa\ l A «l.   ( 12 - U )
                               i                            i

where Cov;(Y}, Yk) stands for the contribution to the covariance from the
ith input quantity, and Sijk indicate the product of the signs of the absolute
increments of Yj and Yk for a variation of Xi (\Aji\ have the meaning of
standard uncertainty of Yj due to Xi alone).
    At this point, we have to remember that fir defined in Sec. 8.6 is consid­
ered as one of the input quantities, and that in the most general case there
will be many fj,rj, each associated with one and only one output quantity
   8
     T h e following notation is used: A + = Y(E[X] + CTX)-Y(E[X]) and A _ = Y(E[X])-
Y(E[X] — ax)- Therefore, for monotonic functions around E[X] the increments A + and
A _ have the same sign.
278          Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical     introduction


Yj. The resulting covariance matrix will be equal to the sum of the covari-
ance matrix of the \iTi (they can be correlated because they could come
from fitting procedures, unfolding, or other statistical techniques) and the
covariance matrix due to the systematic effects. Let us write down, as an
easy and practical example, the formulae for the case when we have N
values /j,r and the influence quantities are uncorrelated:



                 a2(Yj) = a2rj+Y/A%,                                            (12.12)
                                     i>N

            Cov{Yj,Yk)     = Cov(/x r j ,/i r J + J2 sijk |Aji| | A W | ,       (12.13)
                                                 i>N



where we have taken into account that the Aji associated with /j,ri are given
by Ajj = (Ji Sij, where Sij is the Kronecker symbol. In fact, the derivatives
of Yj with respect to firi, evaluated at the point of best estimate of X, are
equal to 1 if i = j , and equal to 0 otherwise.



12.4.2   Small deviations       from       linearity
Let us consider now nonlinearity effects, which are mostly responsible for
the published asymmetric uncertainties due to systematics. Nonlinearity in
fact makes A + i i and A_ j ; differ considerably. We treat here only second-
order effects. Figure 12.2 shows an example of the transformation of some
important p.d.f.'s, all characterized by E(X) = 0 and o{X) = 1, while
Fig. 12.3 shows the probability distribution of two variables based on those
of Fig. 12.2. One can see that indeed the p.d.f. of the sum of both the
original and the transformed quantities can be described by a Gaussian for
the practical purposes of interest in uncertainty evaluations (see Fig. 4.5
for another striking example).
    In order to simplify the formulae, let us consider first the case of only
one input quantity and one output quantity (see Appendix B of Ref. [136]
for the general case). Taking the second-order expansion, we have



                         f)Y                1 B2Y
      Y = Y(E[X})    +QX(X-         E[X]) + - — ( * - E[X}f .                   (12.14)
             Asymmetric    uncertainties     and nonlinear     propagation            279


Expected value and variance of Y are then

           E(Y)=Y(E[X})          + ±^a2(X),                                       (12.15)

          a2(F)=
                      (H) 2 < T 2 ( X ) + SS E t ( X - E [ X ] ) 3 ]
                     +
                          I {iPj tE[(X ~ E[X])4] ~                     ff4(X)
                                                                             ]■   (12 16)
                                                                                     -
These formulae can be transformed into more practical ones if the deriva­
tives are replaced by their numerical evaluations from the ±lcr variations
of X around E(X), which produce variations A± in Y. The approximate
derivatives evaluated in E[X] are

                  g I * l ( ^ + ^       )= A+ + A-                                (1217)
                                                                                   K
                  dX   2 \a{X)    a{X)J     2a(X)   '                                   '
                 02Y_,   W A +          A^_A+-A_                                  (12J8)
                 dX2   a(X) \a(X)     a{X)J     a2(X) '
The formula of the variance, Eq. (12.16), can be simplified using skewness
(S) and kurtosis (/C), defined as

                                      E[(X-E[X]f]
                           S(X) =       - a3(x)                                   (12.19)

                                      E    [(X-E[X])
                          W)      =              -A,^
                                                 o*(X)        ~ ■                 (12-20)

We get finally

                 E(Y)=Y(E[X])         + d,                                        (12.21)
              cr2{Y) = A 2 + 2 A ■ S ■ S{X) + S2 ■ [K{X) - 1] ,                       (12.22)

where S is the semi-difference of the two shifts and A is their average:

                                  S= ^ - ^                                        (12.23)

                                           A +       A
                                 A=              ^       "-                       (12-24)

The interpretation of Eq. (12.21) is simple and corresponds to a procedure
that some might have already guessed: Asymmetric uncertainties produce a
shift in the best estimate of the quantities. In the case that the dependence
280            Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


between Y and X is linear, <5 is « 0 and we recover the result given in
Sec. 12.4.1. Note also that the second term of Eq. (12.22) disappears if the
distribution describing the uncertainty on X is symmetric around E(X)
(skewness is an indicator of asymmetry), and that the third term plays a
minor role, since the difference between A + and A_ is usually smaller than
their sum, and JC(X) is around 2 or 3 for the distributions of interest (see
Fig. 8.1, which gives standard deviation, skewness and kurtosis of some
distributions important to model uncertainty in measurement).
     The extension to several independent input quantities is straightfor­
ward, as one only needs to add together the individual contributions to
expected value and the variance. Considering the most common case in
which the second and third terms of the r.h.s. of Eq. (12.22) are negligi­
ble 9 , we obtain the following simple practical formulae:

                            E(y) « y(E[X]) + £ > ,                              (12.25)

                           <T2(Y)«£A;.                                          (12.26)
                                          i

Averaging positive and negative deviations is indeed a good practice, but
the shift of the central value should not be neglected. For the separation
of input quantities into /xr; and influence factor, see Eqs. (12.12)-(12.13).
The formulae for the more general case of several output quantities and of
correlations among input quantities can be found in Ref. [136].


12.5    Numerical examples

Let us go back to the numerical example at the beginning of this chapter.
Those numbers were indeed simulated from a quadratic dependence of Y
on the influence quantities, each having a slightly different functional form
and a different model to describe its uncertainty. Including also \iT as Xo,
we can write the dependence of Y on Xi in the following explicit form:
                                     3

                              F = ^ a         i   I , +      ftI,2,             (12.27)
                                    i=0

where Qj and /3i are given in Tab. 12.1, in which the uncertainty model is
also indicated. As stated in Sec. 12.1, the expression 'reasonable variation
   9
    For symmetric distributions the skewness is zero, while the kurtosis is around 3 for
the distributions of interest and enters with S2.
Table 12.1 Parameters of the input quantities used in the numerical example of the text. A"o is
identified with the value /4 r , obtained when A"i_3 are equal to their expected values.
      Interpretation 1: 'reasonable variations'   = ±lcT   for all Xi
 Input/Output         Model p.d.f.     E[X]       a(X)        a          fi     AY-        AY+
   X0(= Hr)        Gaussian              1         0.05       1          0     +0.050     +0.050
       X!          Gaussian              0          0.3     0.25      -0.167   +0.090     +0.060
       x2          Triangular [—1,1]     0         0.41     0.30      -0.147   +0.147     +0.098
       x3          Uniform [-1,1]        0         0.58     0.225     -0.078   +0.156     +0.104
       Y           « Gaussian          0.93       0.20




        Interpretation 2: 'reasonable variations' = ±1(7 for iir and X i ; ± A i for others
 Input/Output           Model p.d.f.     E[X] C T ( A - )   a          P        AY-          AY+
                                                                               (rescaledt at 1 &Xi)
   X 0 (=A«r)        Gaussian              1       0.05      1         0       +0.050       +0.050
                     Gaussian              0        0.3   .0.25     -0.167     +0.090       +0.060
        x2           Triangular [—1,1]     0       0.41   0.123    -0.0245     +0.054       +0.046
        Xz           Uniform [-1,1]        0       0.58   0.130     -0.026     +0.084       +0.066
         Y           ta G a u s s i a n  0.97     0.13

t The rescaling is applied to input quantities not described by Gaussian models, i.e. X2 and X3.
282           Bayesian   reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


of the parameters' was intentionally left vague. We consider the two cases
in which the variations of non-Gaussian quantities correspond to ± 1 a or
to d= half-interval, respectively ('interpretation 1' and 'interpretation 2' in
Tab. 12.1). The details of the first evaluation are

         E(Y) = 1.00 + ^2Si = 1.00 + (0 - 0.015 - 0.026 - 0.0245)
                              i
               = 0.9345,                                                         (12.28)
         2     2
        a (Y)=a r(Y)       + a%s(Y)
               = (0.05) + (0.1983)2 = (0.2046)2 .
                          2
                                                                                 (12.29)

(see Ref. [136] for further details). This result can be summarized as Y^ =
0.93 ± 0.05 ± 0.20 = 0.93 ± 0.20. The result given in Eqs. (12.28)-(12.29)
is in perfect agreement with E(Y) = 0.9344 and a(Y) = 0.2046 obtained
directly from the p.d.f. of Y estimated by Monte Carlo with 106 extractions.
In contrast, the result obtained combining separately positive and negative
deviations in quadrature (see Sec. 12.1) shows a bias which amounts to 35%
of a. Assuming the second interpretation we would get

         E(Y) = 1.00 + Y, 6i = L 0 ° + (° _ °- 015 " °- 004 ~ °-009)
                                  i
                = 0.972,                                                         (12.30)
        a'(Y)=al{Y)+alys{Y)
                = (0.05)2 + (0.1173)2 = (0.1275)2 ,                              (12.31)

i.e. F( 2 ) = 0.97 ± 0.05 ± 0.12 = 0.97 ± 0.13.


12.6   The non-monotonic case

Sometimes a variation of ± la of an influence parameter might produce
values of Y which are both above or both below the value obtained with
the reference value, i.e. A + and A_ have opposite signs in that case. This
result indicates that the function is not monotonic, and this situation has
to be treated with some care. In fact, although the formulae derived in this
paper do not depend on whether the functions are monotonic or not, the
transformed distribution can be very different from those of Fig. 12.2 and
can bring a large non-Gaussian contribution to the overall distribution. As
an example, let us consider Fig. 12.4, which describes an input quantity
normally distributed around 0 with a = 0.3, a parabolic dependence of
                                          Asymmetric                uncertainties               and nonlinear propagation                                  283




                                                                       Y = Y(X)
        \                                     1.4           /(*)                                         /(»)
                                                    y                               /
                                                / \\                             //
                                                                                                   200
            \                                 1./
                \
                    \                          /        i                    /                     ISO

                     \                      °/ 8 \\                      /
                         \
                             \               /qf. 6 \\\              ///                           100



                                     Ns
                                                            \      //
                                          -7°' 2
                                                                                                    50
                                                                                            x                                                          y
                                                            \''
    -       3       -    2       -   1                         1   2                    3                 0.005   0.01   0.0 5   0.02   0.025   0.03




Fig. 12.4 Example of non-monotonic relation between input and output quantity.
The left plot show the parabolic dependence of Y on X (dashed line) and the
Gaussian p.d.f. of X (solid line). The right plot shows the p.d.f. of Y.

Y on X given by Y = 0.167 X2 (i.e. like Xl of Tab. 12.1, but with the
a = 0 and ft reversed in sign, just for graphical convenience). The ±ler
variations are A + = +0.015 and A_ = —0.015, but certainly one would
not quote 0 as the expected value of Y, nor 0.015 its standard deviation.
E(X) being at the minimum of the distribution, the p.d.f. of X ends sharply
at zero, and is very asymmetric. In fact it is easy to recognize in f(y) a
scale transformation of the \2 with one degree of freedom, namely Y =
0.015 x Xi- Expected values and standard deviation are then E(Y) = 0.015
and a(Y) = 0.015 x y/2 = 0.021. We can compare the result with what we
get from Eqs. (12.21)-(12.22):
                         jj_ = 0.015        f E(Y) = 0 + 0.015 = 0.015
                                     ==
                         A = 0          *' \ a2(Y) = 0 + 0 + 0.0152 x 2 = (0.021)2 .                                                            {
                                                                                                                                                            '
The result is exactly the same, as it should be, since in this example
the function is parabolic and, therefore, there are no approximations in
Eqs. (12.21)-(12.22). We see that in this case only the quadratic terms
appear. Similarly, it would be wrong to consider the best estimate of Y as
equal 0, with an uncertainty equal to the deviation: The result would have
a standard deviation smaller by y/2, and the best estimate would have a
bias of —140% of the reported standard deviation.
This page is intentionally left blank
                               Chapter 13

    Which priors for frontier physics?



                                                "Sometimes I dream of Higgs."
                                     (Tom Stoppard, The real inspector Hound)




The role of priors in inference has been discussed at several places in this
book. In foregoing chapters I have tried to convince the reader, using gen­
eral reasoning, formulae and examples, that in many circumstances priors
are practically irrelevant. But I hope I have not given the impression that
one can always forget about priors, or that Bayesian methods are usable
only when the results are prior-independent. This would give a wrong
sense of the Bayesian spirit, and would reduce much of the power of the
approach for solving complex problems. In this last chapter I shall examine
some cases in which the role of priors is so crucial that it is better to avoid
reporting probabilistic results altogether. We shall see what the formal
- and physical - origin of this problem is, and shall arrive at the useful
classification of closed and open likelihood. Finally some practical recom­
mendations will be given for reporting search results in the most efficient
and unbiased way.


13.1   Frontier physics measurements at the limit to the de­
       tector sensitivity

There are important experiments in physics, that I like to classify with the
label frontier, which have two things in common.
  • Researchers are highly uncertain about the result of the experiment,
    and do not usually share the same opinion about the underlying phe-

                                      285
286          Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


    nomenology.
  • The experimental conditions are extreme, in the sense that what is
    being looked for are very tiny signals in the presence of background
    processes (usually further complicated by the fact that even these back­
    ground processes are not precisely known).

Under these circumstances the lucky case in which the experiment ends with
a spectacular effect, convincing all experts of a uniform interpretation of the
result is extremely rare. Instead, in many cases, there is agreement that the
experiment does not provide hints of the searched for signal. Unfortunately,
situations arise which fall somewhere between these two extreme cases and
researchers may be in serious doubt about what to do, scared and undecided
between losing the chance of a discovery or losing their reputation . . .


13.2   Desiderata for an optimal report of search results

Let us specify an optimal report of a search result in terms of some desired
properties.

 • The way of reporting the result should not depend on whether the
   experimental team is more or less convinced they have found the signal
   they were looking for.
 • The report should allow an easy, consistent and efficient combination
   of all pieces of information which could come from several experiments,
   search channels and running periods. By efficient I mean the following:
   if many independent data sets each provides a little evidence in favor of
   the searched-for signal, the combination of all data should enhance that
   hypothesis; if, instead, the indications provided by the different data are
   incoherent, their combination should result in stronger constraints on
   the intensity of the postulated process (a higher mass, a lower coupling,
   etc.).
 • Even results coming from low sensitivity (and/or very noisy) data sets
   should be included in the combination, without them spoiling the qual­
   ity of the result obtainable by the clean and high-sensitivity data sets
   alone. If the poor-quality data carry the slightest piece of evidence,
   this information should play its correct role and slightly increase the
   global evidence.
 • The presentation of the result (and its meaning) should not depend on
   the particular application (Higgs search, scale of contact-interaction,
                      Which priors for frontier physics ?                 287


     proton decay, etc.).
 •   The result should be stated in such a way that it cannot be misleading.
     This requires that it should easily map onto the natural categories
     developed by the human mind for uncertain events.
 •   Uncertainties due to systematic effects of uncertain size should be in­
     cluded in a consistent and (at least conceptually) simple way.
 •   Subjective contributions of the persons who provide the results should
     be kept to a minimum. These contributions cannot vanish, in the sense
     that we always have to rely on the "understanding, critical analysis and
     integrity" [5] of the experimenters, but at least the dependence on the
     believed values of the quantity should be minimal.
 •   The result should summarize the experiment in the most complete
     way, and no extra items of information (luminosity, cross-sections, ef­
     ficiencies, expected number of background events, observed number of
     events) should be required for further analyses.
 •   The result should be ready to be turned into probabilistic statements,
     needed to form one's opinion about the quantity of interest or to take
     decisions.
 •   The result should not lead to paradoxical conclusions.



13.3    Master example: Inferring the intensity of a Poisson
        process in the presence of background

As a guiding example to be referred to throughout the rest of this chapter,
let us consider a case which often happens in frontier physics. We assume
that a physics process, believed to exist, produces events modelled with a
Poisson distribution, whose expected value is proportional to the observa­
tion time T, i.e. X ~ VTT- Our aim is to infer the process intensity r on the
basis of the observed number of events. Unfortunately, the assumed pro­
cess is not the only cause of the observed events. Other processes, generally
speaking noise, could produce similar observations. A practical example of
this type of experimental scenario is the difficult task of measuring the rate
of gravitational wave (g.w.) bursts above a certain threshold (for details
see Ref. [137], on which this chapter is mostly based). To fix our ideas
in physics terms we shall refer through this chapter to this example and
use the expressions 'intensity of Poisson process' and 'g.w. burst rate' as
synonyms. Since in this kind of search, a coincidence of at least two g.w.
detectors is required in order to reduce the background, we shall often refer
288             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical              introduction


to the 'events' as coincidences, and indicate them by nc (corresponding the
the generic x used elsewhere in this book).


13.4      Modelling the inferential process

Now that the inferential scheme has been set up, let us rephrase our problem
in the language of Bayesian statistics.

  • The physical quantity of interest, with respect to which we are in a
    state of great uncertainty, is the g.w. burst rate r.
  • We feel quite confident1 about the expected rate of background events
    rt, (but not about the number which will actually be observed).
  • What is certain is the number nc of coincidences which have been ob­
    served (stating that the observed number of coincidences is nc ± ^frTc
    does not make any sense!), although we do not know how many of these
    events have to be attributed to background and how many (if any) to
    g.w. bursts.

For a given hypothesis r the number of coincidence events which can be
observed in the observation time T is described by a Poisson process having
an intensity which is the sum of that due to background and that due to
signal. Therefore the likelihood is

                      / K k , n ) = :d^<i±i>>i£,                                             „„,
                                                    nc\

and, making use of Bayes' theorem, we get
                                   e~(r+rb)Tu           ,        r,)T)nc
                                                U           6J     j
                   f(r\nc,rb)<x-                    ,                      /„(r).           '(13.2)


13.5      Choice of priors

At this point we are faced with the problem of what f0 (r) to choose. The
best way of understanding why this choice can be troublesome is to illustrate
the problem with numerical examples. Let us consider T as unit time (e.g.
one month), a background rate r& such that rj x T = 1, and the following
hypothetical observations: nc = 0; nc = 1; nc = 5.
  1
      Uncertainty about r^ can be handled easily in our scheme, as seen in Chapters
                           Which priors for frontier physics ?                   289


                f
            1


         0.8


         0.6


         0.4


         0.2


                          2           4     6           8        10       12


Fig. 13.1 Distribution of the values of the rate r, in units of events/month, in­
ferred from an expected rate of background events r& = 1 event/month, an initial
uniform distribution fo (r) = k and the following numbers of observed events: 0
(solid); 1 (dashed); 5 (dotted).



13.5.1    Uniform             prior
One might think that a good 'democratic' choice would be a uniform distri­
bution in r, i.e. fo(r) = k. Inserting this prior in Eq. (13.2) and normalizing
the final distribution we get, using Eq. (7.75),


                    f(r\nc,rb,f0(r)=k)          =                (rtT),   ■    (13.3)
                                                    n
                                                     c- /L,n=0     n\

The resulting final distributions are shown in Fig. 13.1. For nc = 0 and
1 the distributions are peaked at zero, while for nc = 5 the distribution
appears so neatly separated from r = 0 that it seems a convincing proof
that the postulated physics process searched for does exist. In the cases
nc = 0 and 1 researchers usually present the result with an upper limit
(typically 95%) on the basis that f(r) seems compatible with no effect, as
suggested by Fig. 13.1. For example, in the simplest and well-known case
of nc = 0 the 95% C.L. upper limit is 3 events/month (see Sec. 7.4.1). The
usual meaning [30] one attributes to the limit is that, if the physics process
of interest exists, then there is a 95 % probability that its rate is below 3
290           Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


events/month, resulting from the following equation
                      3
                      f{r | nc = 0, rb = 1, f0(r) =k)dr    = 0.95.             (13.4)
                 /
But there are other infinite probabilistic statements that can be derived
from f(r\rb = l,nc = 0). For example, P(r > 3events/month) = 5 % ,
P{r > 0.1 events/month) = 90%, P(r > 0.01 events/month) = 99%, and
so on. Without doubt, researchers will not hesitate to publish the 95 % up­
per limit, but they would feel uncomfortable stating that they believe 99 %
that, if the g.w. bursts exist at all, then the rate is above 0.01 events/month.
The reason for this uneasiness can be found in the uniform prior, which
might not correspond to the prior knowledge that researchers really have.
Let us, then, examine more closely the meaning of the uniform distribution
and its consequences. Saying that / 0 (f) = k, means that dP/dr = k, i.e.
P oc Ar; for example,

  P(0.1 < r < 1) = — P ( l < r < 10) = — P(10 < r < 100)... ,                  (13.5)

and so on. But, taken literally, this prior is hardly ever reasonable, at
least for the physics case of gravitational wave detection. The problem is
not due to the divergence for r —> oo which makes fa(r) not normalizable,
i.e. 'improper' (see Sec. 6.5). This mathematical nuisance is automati­
cally cured when f0(r) is multiplied by the likelihood, which, for a finite
number of observed events, vanishes rapidly enough for r —> oo. A much
more serious problem is related to the fact that the uniform distribution
assigns to all the infinite orders of magnitude below 1 a probability which
is only 1/9 of the probability of the decade between 1 and 10, or 1 % of
the probability of the first two decades, and so on. This is the reason why,
even if no coincidence events have been observed, the final distribution
obtained from zero events observed (solid curve of Fig. 13.1) implies that
P(r > 1 event/month) = 37%.


13.5.2    Jeffreys'       prior
A prior distribution alternative to the uniform can be based on the obser­
vation that what often seems uniform is not the probability per unit of r,
but rather the probability per decade of r, i.e. researchers may feel equally
uncertain about the orders of magnitudes of r, namely

      P(0.1 < r < 1) = P ( l < r < 10) = P(10 < r < 1 0 0 ) . . . .            (13.6)
                            Which   priors       for frontier   physics?         291


                    f
                5


                4


                3


                2


                1

                        I     2              4             6           8   10r
                    f
                5

                4


                3


                2


                1

                        L     2              4             6           8   10



Fig. 13.2 Final distributions for the same experimental configuration of Fig. 13.1,
but with a Jeffreys' prior with cut-off at rmin — 0.01 events/month (upper plot)
and rmin = 0.1 events/month (lower plot).

This implies that dP/d\nr = k, or dP/dr oc 1/r. This prior is known as
Jeffreys' prior [49] (see also Ref. [46], and it is very interesting indeed, at
least from a very abstract point of view (though it tends to be misused,
as is discussed in Ref. [33]). If we take Jeffreys' prior literally, it does not
work in our case either. In fact, when inserted in Eq. (13.2), it produces a
divergence for r —> 0. This is due to the infinite orders of magnitude below
1, to each of which we give equal prior probability, and to the fact that the
likelihood (13.1) goes to a constant for r -> 0. Therefore, for any r0 > 0,
we have P(r < r0)/P(r > r0) = oo. To get a finite result we need a cut-off
at a given rmin.
     As an exercise, just to get a feeling of both the difference with respect
to the case of the uniform distribution, and the dependence on the cut­
off, we report in Fig. 13.2 the results obtained for the same experimental
292           Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical        introduction


conditions as Fig. 13.1, but with a Jeffreys' prior truncated at r m j„ = 0.1
and 0.01. One can see that the final distributions conditioned by 0 or 1
events observed are pulled towards r = 0 by the new priors, while the case
of nc = 5 is more robust, although it is no longer nicely separated from
zero.


13.5.3    Role of     priors
The strong dependence of the final distributions on the priors shown in
this example should not be considered a bad feature, as if it were just an
artifact of Bayesian inference. Putting it the other way round, the Bayesian
inference reproduces, in a formal way, what researchers already have clear
in their minds as a result of intuition and experience. In the numerical
examples we are dealing with, the dependence of the final distributions on
the priors is just a hint of the fact that the experimental data are not so
strong as to lead every scientist to the same conclusion (in other words, the
experimental and theoretical situation is far from being the well-established
one upon which intersubjectivity is based). The possibility that scientists
might have distant and almost non-overlapping priors, such that agreement
is reached only after a huge amount of very convincing data, should not be
overlooked, as this is, in fact, the typical situation in frontier research. For
this reason, one should worry, instead, about statistical methods which
advertise 'objective' probabilistic results in such a critical situation.
    When the experimental situation is more solid, as for example in the
case of five events observed out of only 0.1 expected from background, the
conclusions become very similar, virtually independent of the priors (see
Fig. 13.3), unless the priors reflected really widely differing opinions.


13.5.4    Priors    reflecting   the positive    attitude       of      researchers
Having clarified the role of priors in the assessment of probabilistic state­
ments about true values, and their critical influence on frontier-research re­
sults, it is clear that, in our opinion, "reference priors do not exist" [33,107].
However, I find that the "concept of a 'minimal informative' prior specifi­
cation - appropriately defined!" [27] can sometimes be useful, if the practi­
tioner is aware of the assumptions behind the specification.
    We can now ask ourselves what kind of prior would be shared by rational
and responsible people who have planned, financed and operated a frontier-
type experiment. This is what I like to call 'positive attitude of researchers'
                           Which priors for frontier physics?                              293


                   f
             0.2
          0.175
            0.15
          0.125
             0.1
          0.075
            0.05
          0.025

                          2        4       6        8      10      12       14


Fig. 13.3 Distribution of the values of the rate r, in units of events/month, in­
ferred from five observed events, an expected rate of background events rt, = 0.1
events/month, and the following priors: uniform distribution /o(r) = k (solid);
Jeffreys' prior truncated at rmin = 0.01 (dashed). The case of the Jeffreys' priors
is also reported for r;, = 1 event/month (dotted).

(see Sec. 6.7). Certainly, the researchers believed there was a good chance,
depending on the kind of measurement, that they would end up with a
number of candidate events well above the background; or that the physical
quantity of interest was well above the experimental resolution; or that a
certain rate would be in the region of sensitivity.2 One can show that
the results obtained with reasonable prior distributions, chosen to model
this positive attitude, are very similar to those obtainable by an improper
uniform prior and, in particular, the upper/lower bounds obtained are very
stable (see Sees. 6.7 and 7.7.1).
    Let us apply this idea to this chapter guiding example: 0, 1 or 5 events
observed over a background of 1 event (Fig. 13.1). Searching for a rare
   2
     In some cases researchers are aware of having very little chance of observing anything,
but they pursue the research to refine instrumentation and analysis tools in view of some
positive results in the future. A typical case is gravitational wave search. In this case it is
not scientifically correct to provide probabilistic upper limits from the current detectors,
and the honest way to provide the result is that described here [138]. However, some
could be tempted to use a frequentistic procedure which provided an 'objective' upper
limit 'guaranteed' to have a 95% coverage. This behavior is irresponsible since these
researchers are practically sure that the true value is below the limit. Loredo shows
in Sec. 3.2 of Ref. [139] an instructive real-life example of a 90% C.I. which certainly
does not contain the true value (the web site [139] contains several direct comparisons
between frequentistic versus Bayesian results).
294             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical    introduction


process with a detector having a background of 1 event/month, for an
exposure time of one month, a positive attitude would be to think that
signal rates of several events per month are quite possible. On the other
hand, the fact that the process is considered to be rare implies that one
does not expect a very large rate (i.e. large rates would contradict previous
experimental information), and also that there is some belief that the rate
could be very small, virtually zero. Let us assume that the researchers are
almost sure that the rate is below 30 events/month. We can consider, for
instance, the following prior distributions.

       A uniform distribution between 0 and 30:

                   /o(r) = 1/30                               (0 < r < 30).         (13.7)

       A triangular distribution:

                    /oM = ^ ( 3 0 - r )                       (0 < r < 30).        (13.8)

       A half-Gaussian distribution of aQ = 10
                                                     .2   1
                       Mr) =                 exp                (r > 0).           (13.9)
                                   2-7T a,         2 ^
The last two functions model the fact that researchers might believe that
small values of r are more possible than high values, as is often the case.
Moreover, the half-Gaussian distribution also describes the more realistic
belief that rates above 30 events/month are not excluded, although they
are considered very unlikely.3 The three priors are shown in the upper plot
of Fig. 13.4. The resulting final distributions are shown in the lower plot of
the same figure. The three solutions are practically indistinguishable, and,
in particular, very similar to the results obtained by an improper uniform
distribution (Fig. 13.1). This suggests that the improper uniform prior
represents a practical and easy way of representing the prior specification
for this kind of problem if one assumes what we have called the positive
attitude of the researchers. Therefore, this prior could represent a way of
reporting conventional probabilistic results, if one is aware of the limits of
the convention. Seeking a truly objective probabilistic result — I stress yet
again — is an illusory dream.
   3
    As discussed in Ref. [72], realistic priors can be roughly modelled by a log-normal
distribution. With parameters chosen to describe the positive attitude we are consider­
ing, this distribution would give results practically equivalent to the three priors we are
using now.
                         Which priors for frontier physics ?                                295



             0.081--..


             0.06 ■



             0.04



             0.02



                           5          10        15         20            25        30




                                                                    10        12



Fig. 13.4 The upper plot shows some reasonable priors reflecting the positive atti­
tude of researchers: uniform distribution (solid); triangular distribution (dashed);
half-Gaussian distribution (dotted). The lower plot shows how the results of
Fig. 13.1, obtained starting from an improper uniform distribution, (do not!)
change if, instead, the priors of the upper plot are used.


13.6    Prior-free presentation of the experimental evidence

At this point, I want to reassure the reader that it is possible to present
data in an 'objective' way, on the condition that all thoughts of providing
probabilistic results about the measurand are abandoned.
   Let us again take Bayes' theorem, which we rewrite here in terms of the
uncertain quantities of interest

                         f(r\nc,rb)        oc f(nc\r,rb)        •    fQ(r),             (13.10)
296          Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical                    introduction


and consider only two possible values of r, let them be r\ and r2- From
Eq. (13.10) it follows that

                   f(ri \nc,rb)     =       f(nc\ri,rb)            f0(ri)                      (13 11)
                   f(r2\nc,rb)              f(nc\r2,rb)                f0(r2)'
                                            y
                                                    v          '
                                            Bayes factor
This is a common way of rewriting the result of the Bayesian inference for
a couple of hypotheses, keeping the contributions due to the experimental
evidence and to the prior knowledge separate. The ratio of likelihoods is
known as the Bayes factor and it quantifies the ratio of evidence provided
by the data in favor of either hypothesis. The Bayes factor is considered to
be practically objective because likelihoods (i.e. probabilistic description
of the detector response) are usually much less critical than priors about
the physics quantity of interest.
    The Bayes factor can be extended to a continuous set of hypotheses r,
considering a function which gives the Bayes factor of each value of r with
respect to a reference value TREF- The reference value could be arbitrary,
but for our problem the choice TREF = 0, giving

                       T>(          ^             f(nc\r,rb)                                   /IQIO\
                           (r;ne rt) =                                                         (13 12)
                       *        '               / ( n e | r = 0,r»)'                              "
is very convenient for comparing and combining the experimental re­
sults [140,38]. The function 1Z has nice intuitive interpretations which can
be highlighted by reordering the terms of Eq. (13.11) in the form

  f(r\nc,rb)  / f(r = 01 nc,rb)                f(nc\r,rb)                                      /IQIQ\
                                        =
  - I J r T /      /o(r = 0)                /(nc|r = 0>r6)=W(r;ne'r')                          ( m 3 )


(valid for all possible a priori r values). 1Z has the probabilistic interpre­
tation of relative belief updating ratio, or the geometrical interpretation of
shape distortion function of the probability density function. 1Z goes to 1
for r —> 0, i.e. in the asymptotic region in which the experimental sensitiv­
ity is lost: As long as 7Z stays at 1, the shape of the p.d.f. (and therefore
the relative probabilities in that region) remains unchanged. Instead, in
the limit TZ —► 0 (for large r) the final p.d.f. vanishes, i.e. the beliefs go
to zero no matter how strong they were before. In the case of the Poisson
process we are considering, the relative belief updating factor becomes

                    TZ(r;nc,rb,T)=e-rT                  (l + ^ \            ,                  (13.14)
                          Which priors for frontier physics ?                            297


                   R



              10


               1


            0.1


          0.01



                             0.01          0.1            1            10


Fig. 13.5 Relative belief updating ratio It for the Poisson intensity parameter r
for the cases of Fig. 13.1.


with the condition 4 r& > 0 if nc > 0.
    Figure 13.5 shows the TZ function for the numerical examples considered
above. The abscissa has been drawn in a log scale to make it clear that
several orders of magnitude are involved. These curves transmit the result
of the experiment immediately and intuitively:

  • whatever one's beliefs on r were before the data, these curves show how
    one must change them;
  • the beliefs one had for rates far above 20 events/month are killed by
    the experimental result;
  • if one believed strongly that the rate had to be below 0.1 events/month,
    the data are irrelevant;
  • the case in which no candidate events have been observed gives the
    strongest constraint on the rate r;
  • the case of five candidate events over an expected background of
    one produces a peak of 1Z which corroborates the beliefs around 4
    events/month only if there were sizable prior beliefs in that region.
   4
    T h e case r j = nc = 0 yields 1Z(r) = e _ r , obtainable starting directly from
Eq. (13.12), defining 1Z, and from Eq. (13.1), giving the likelihood. Also the case j-f, —> oo
has to be evaluated directly from the definition of TZ and from the likelihood, yielding
TZ = 1 Vr; finally, the case r j = 0 and nc > 0 makes r = 0 impossible, thus prompting
a claim for discovery - and it no longer makes sense for the TZ function defined above to
have that nice asymptotic behavior in the insensitivity region.
298            Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical      introduction


Moreover there are some technical advantages in reporting the 1Z function
as a result of a search experiment.

  • One deals with numerical values which can differ from unity only by a
    few orders of magnitude in the region of interest. Instead, the values of
    the likelihood can be extremely low. For this reason, the comparison
    between different results given by the TZ function can be perceived
    better than if these results were published in terms of likelihood.
  • Since TZ differs from the likelihood only by a factor, it can be used
    directly in Bayes' theorem, which does not depend on constants, when­
    ever probabilistic considerations are needed.5 In fact,

                            f(r | nc rb) oc TZ(r; nc, n) ■ f0(r).                     (13.15)

  • The combination of different independent results on the same 6 quantity
    r can be done straightforwardly by multiplying individual TZ functions:

                             K(r; all data) = UiTZ(r; data*).                       (13.16)

  • Finally, one does not need to decide           a priori if one wants to make a
    'discovery' or an 'upper limit' analysis       as conventional statistics teaches
    (see e.g. criticisms in Ref. [13]): the        TZ function represents the most
    unbiased way of presenting the results         and everyone can draw their own
    conclusions.


13.7     Some examples of 72.-function based on real data

The case study we have been dealing with is based on a toy model simula­
tion. To see how the proposed method provides the experimental evidence
in a clear way we show in Figs. 13.6 and 13.7 1Z-functions based on real
data.     The first is a reanalysis of Higgs search data at LEP [38]; the
second comes from the search for contact interactions at HERA made by
ZEUS [140]. The extension of Eq. (13.12) to the most general case is

                            ^;data) = # ^ L ,                                      (13.17)
                                      /(data|Mins)'
    5
      Note that, although it is important to present prior-free results, at a certain moment
a probability assessment about r can be important, for example, in forming one's own
idea about the most likely range of r, or in taking decisions about planning and financing
of future experiments.
    6
      See comments about the choice of the energy threshold in Ref. [72],
                       Which priors for frontier physics?                                        299



       1.2
             : SR                                          --..
        1
                                                            D                 ^
             _
       0.8

       0.6 -                                     0

       0.4 —
                                                           LEP 3 , 4
       0.2 -
                                                     ^-A
              1111111111               iCw-rt'
                           1 1 1 1 1 L.IJ.       I.J.J 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
        0
             60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 105 110
                                  m H (GeV)
Fig. 13.6 7£-function reporting results on Higgs direct search from the reanalysis
performed in Ref. [38]. A, D and O stand for ALEPH, DELPHI and OPAL
experiments. Their combined result is indicated by LEP3. The full combination
(LEP4) was obtained by assuming for L3 experiment a behavior equal to the
average of the others experiments.


where / i m s stands for the asymptotic insensitivity value (0 or 00, depending
on the physics case) of the generic quantity (x. Figures 13.6 and 13.7 show
clearly what is going on, namely which values are practically ruled out and
which ones are inaccessible t o t h e experiment. This m e t h o d has also been
used recently t o report results of gravitational wave bursts [138].



13.8    Sensitivity b o u n d versus probabilistic b o u n d

It is rather evident from Figs. 13.5, 13.6 and 13.7 how we can summarize
the result with a single number which gives an idea of an upper or lower
bound. In fact, although the 7£-function represents the most complete
and unbiased way of reporting the result, it might also be convenient to
express with just one number t h e result of a search which is considered
by the researchers t o be unfruitful. This number can be any value chosen
by convention in the region where H has a transition from 1 to 0. This
value would then delimit (although roughly) the region of the values of
the quantity which are definitively excluded from the region in which the
300                Bayesian               reasoning in data analysis: A critical             introduction



         < . 1.4
         DC         1
                                          vv
                                  —         E=+1
             1.2                  - -       E=-1

               1

             0.8
                    - > - > ■ < - > - <


             0.6

             0.4



                                                                       N;
             0.2
                    -   I i I i I                  i
               0
                                                                                10                        10
         S 1.4      -
         DC                               AA
                    :
                        i         —         E=+1
             1.2 ;                "-        E=-1                   ! ki"M-L
               1
                    |                                  ; ! ! / ! !            N^^E       ; ;
             0.8

             0.6    i                              i IM                              I i^
             0.4

             0.2
                                                   ! r ^ ^ MM!
                        i    i i i i               /      i.   i   i   i    i i i    i   i    i   i   i
               0
                                                                                10                        10
                                                                                                  A (TeV)

Fig. 13.7 7£-functions r e p o r t i n g results on search for c o n t a c t interactions [140].
T h e Z E U S p a p e r c o n t a i n s t h e detailed information t o o b t a i n these curves.


experiment can say nothing. The meaning of this bound is not that of a
probabilistic limit, but of a wall7 which separates the region in which we
'are', and where we see nothing, from the region we cannot see. We may
take as the conventional position of the wall the point where TZ(rs) equals
50%, 5% or 1% of the insensitivity plateau. What is important is not to call
this value a bound at a given probability level (or at a given confidence level
- the perception of the result by the user will be the same! [30]). A possible
unambiguous name, corresponding to what this number indeed is, could
   7
     In most cases it is not a sharp solid wall. A hedge might be more realistic, and
indeed more poetic: "Sempre caro mi fu quell'ermo colle, / E questa siepe, che da tanta
parte / Dell'ultimo orizzonte il guardo esclude" (Giacomo Leopardi, L'Infinito).    The
exact position of the hedge doesn't really matter, if we think that on the other side of
the hedge there are infinite orders of magnitude unaccessible to us.
                      Which priors for frontier physics ?                   301


be standard sensitivity bound. As the conventional level, my suggestion is
to choose 11 = 0.05 [72]. This convention has the advantage that it allows
recovery of upper 95% probability bounds obtained in the case of no events
observed in an experiment characterized by Poisson likelihood and assuming
a uniform prior. Anyhow, choosing a different convention does not change
the substance of the result, as we can see from Figs. 13.5, 13.6 and 13.7.
    Note that it does not make much sense to give the standard sensitivity
bound with many significant digits. The reason becomes clear by observing
Figs. 13.5-13.7, in particular Fig. 13.7. I don't think that there will be a
single physicist who, judging from the figure, believes that there is a sub­
stantial difference concerning the scale of a postulated contact interaction
for e = + 1 and e = —1. Similarly, looking at Fig. 13.5, the observation of
0 events, instead of 1 or 2, should not produce a significant modification
of our opinion about g.w. burst rates. What really matters is the order of
magnitude of the bound or, depending on the problem, the order of mag­
nitude of the difference between the bound and the kinematic threshold. A
limit should be considered on the same footing as an uncertainty, not as
a true value. Sometimes I get the impression that when some people talk
about a '95% confidence limit', they think as if they were '95% confident
about the limit'. It seems to me that for this reason some are disappointed
to see upper limits on the Higgs mass fluctuating, in contrast to lower limits
which are more stable and in constant increase with the increasing avail­
able energy. In fact, as explained in Ref. [59], these two 95% C.L. limits
don't have the same meaning. It is quite well understood by experts that
most 95% C.L. limits are in practice « 100% probability limits (see also
Ref. [60]) - and, then, the frequentistic concept of 'exact coverage' is just
an illusion! (See Sec. 10.7.)
    I can imagine that at this point there are still researchers who would like
to give, in addition to 1Z function and sensitivity bound, probabilistic limits.
In my opinion, the most honest way would be for these researchers to use
the likelihood information (or the 1Z function) together with their initial
subjective beliefs to get final beliefs. This procedure is at least unambiguous
and would allow the reader to have an idea of what these authors were really
thinking (which is what matters in practice, assuming these authors are
authoritative scientists! - see Sec. 10.4). An alternative way, of presenting
probabilistic results (one which would be more a matter of convention, but
which, unfortunately, does not correspond to real beliefs of a real person),
is to provide probabilistic limits justified with what in Sec. 13.5.4 was called
'positive attitude of researchers'. There it was shown that, no matter how
302          Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


this 'positive attitude' is reasonably modelled, the final p.d.f. is, for the
case of g.w. bursts (/i m s = 0), very similar to that obtained by a uniform
distribution. Therefore, a uniform prior could be used to provide some kind
of conventional probabilistic upper limits, which could look acceptable to
all those who share that kind of positive attitude. But, certainly, it is
not possible to pretend that these probabilistic conclusions could be shared
by everyone. Note, however, that this reasoning cannot be applied in a
straightforward way when / i m s = oo, as can be easily understood (though
there is no problem with the result presented in terms of the 1Z-function).
In such a case one can work on a sensible conjugate variable which has the
asymptotic insensitivity limit at 0. For example, in the case of a search
for 'contact interactions', one could use the quantity e/A 2 in place of A
[62,140,141]. Ref. [62] also contains the basic idea of using a sensitivity
bound, though formulated differently in terms of 'resolution power cut-off.'
(This was my instinctive way, at that time before I even knew what Bayes'
theorem was, for getting rid of the unsatisfactory 'prescriptions' I found in
the literature.)



13.9   Open versus closed likelihood

Figures 13.5, 13.6 and 13.7 show clearly the reason that frontier measure­
ments are crucially dependent on priors: the likelihood only vanishes on
one side (let us call these measurements open likelihood). In other cases the
likelihood goes to zero in both sides {closed likelihood). Normal routine mea­
surements belong to the second class, and usually they are characterized by
a narrow likelihood, meaning high precision. Most physics measurements
belong to the class of closed priors. The two classes can be treated differ­
ently, though the publication of non trivial (i.e. non-Gaussian) likelihood is
recommended in all cases. This does not mean recovering frequentistic 'flip-
flop' (see Ref. [73] and references therein), but recognizing the qualitative,
not just quantitative, difference between the two cases.
    When the likelihood is closed, the sensitivity on the choice of prior is
much reduced, and a probabilistic result can easily be given. The better-
understood subcase is when the likelihood is a very narrow distribution
(possibly Gaussian). Any reasonable prior which models the knowledge of
the expert interested in the inference is practically constant in the narrow
range around the maximum of the likelihood. Therefore, we get the same
result obtained by a uniform prior. However, when the likelihood is not so
                      Which priors for frontier physics ?                 303


narrow, there could still be some dependence on the prior used. Again, this
problem has no solution if inference is considered as a kind mathematical
game [33] and fancy mathematical functions are proposed (but I will always
ask the proposer "do you really think so? are you prepared to gamble,
with odds based on your prior?"). Things are less problematic if one uses
physics intuition and experience. The idea is to use a uniform prior on
the quantity which is 'naturally measured' by the experiment. This might
look like an arbitrary concept, but is in fact an idea to which experienced
physicists are accustomed. For example, we say that 'a tracking devise
measures l/p\ 'radiative corrections measure log(M//)', 'a neutrino mass
experiment is sensitive to m 2 ', and so on. We can see that our intuitive
idea of 'the quantity really measured' is related to the quantity which has
a linear dependence on the observation (s). When this is the case, random
(Brownian) effects occurring during the process of measurement tend to
produce a roughly Gaussian distribution of observations. In other words,
we are dealing with a roughly Gaussian likelihood. So, a way to state
the natural measured quantity is to refer to the quantity for which the
likelihood is roughly Gaussian. This is the reason why we do least-square
fits choosing the variable in which the x2 is parabolic (i.e. the likelihood
is normal) and then interpret the result as probability of the true value. I
would recommend continuing with the tradition of considering natural the
quantity which gives a roughly normal likelihood. For example, this was the
original motive for proposing e/A 2 to report compositeness result [62]. This
uniform-prior/Gaussian-likelihood duality goes back to Gauss himself [68],
and has been shown in Sec. 6.12.
     When there is no agreement about the natural quantity one can make
a sensitivity analysis of the result, as in the exercise of Fig. 13.8, based
on Ref. [142]. If one chooses a prior flat in Higgs mass m # , rather than
in log(m#), the p.d.f.'s given by the continuous curve change into those
given by the dashed curve. Expected value and standard deviation of the
distributions (last digits in parentheses) change from MH = 0.10(7) TeV to
MJJ = 0.14(9) TeV. Although this is just an academic exercise, since it is
rather well accepted that radiative corrections measure log(Mj/), Fig. 13.8
and the above digits show that the result is indeed rather stable, considering
the difficulty of the measurement.
     If a case is really controversial, one can still show the likelihood. But
it is important to understand that a likelihood is not yet the probabilistic
result we physicists want. If only the likelihood is published, the risk is
too high that this likelihood will be interpreted anyway and somehow as if
304           Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical introduction




        0.008-


        0.006


        0.004


        0.002-



                        100        200         300        400        500

Fig. 13.8 Sensitivity analysis exercise from the indirect Higgs mass determination
of Ref. [142]. Solid lines and dashed lines are obtained with priors uniform in
log(mH) and JTIH, respectively.

it were a probabilistic result, as happens now in practice. For this reason
I think that, at least in the rather simple case of closed likelihood, those
who perform the research should recognize their responsibility and, making
use of their best prior knowledge, assess the expected value and standard
deviation (plus other information in the case of a strongly non-Gaussian
distribution) that they really believe. I do not think that, in most applica­
tions, this subjective ingredient would be more influential than the many
other subjective choices made during the course of an experimental and
that we have to accept anyhow. Adhering strictly to the point of view that
one should refrain totally from giving probabilistic results, on the basis
of the idealistic principle of avoiding the contribution of personal priors,
would halt research. We always rely on somebody else's priors and consult
experts. Only a perfect idiot has no priors, and this is not the best person
to consult.
  Part 4


Conclusion
This page is intentionally left blank
                               Chapter 14

         Conclusions and bibliography




                              "You take your life in your own hands, and what
                                 happens? A terrible thing: no one to blame."
                                                                  (Erica Jong)




14.1   About subjective probability and Bayesian inference

I hope to have been able to show that it is possible to build a power­
ful theory of measurement uncertainty starting from subjective probability
and the rules of logics, from which the Bayes' theorem follows. Subjective
probability is based on the natural concept of probability, as degree of be­
lief, related to a status of uncertainty, whilst Bayes' theorem is the logical
tool to update the probability in the light of new pieces of information.
     The main advantages the Bayesian approach has over the others are (in
addition to the non-negligible fact that it is able to treat problems on which
the others fail):

  • the recovery of the intuitive idea of probability as a valid concept for
    treating scientific problems;
  • the simplicity and naturalness of the basic tool;
  • the capability of combining prior knowledge and experimental informa­
    tion;
  • the automatic updating property as soon as new information is avail­
    able;

                                     307
308            Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical introduction


  • the transparency of the method which allows the different assumptions
    on which the inference may depend to be checked and changed;
  • the high degree of awareness that it gives to its user.

    When employed on the problem of measurement errors, as a special
application of conditional probabilities, it allows all possible sources of un­
certainties to be treated in the most general way.
    When the problems get complicated and the general method becomes
too heavy to handle, it is often possible to use approximate methods based
on linearization to evaluate average and standard deviation of the distri­
bution, while the central limit theorem makes the final distributions ap­
proximately Gaussian. Nevertheless, there are some cases in which the
linearization may cause severe problems, as shown in Sec. 8.11. In such
cases one needs to go back to the general method or to apply other kinds
of approximations which are not just blind use of the covariance matrix.
    Many conventional (frequentistic) methods can be easily recovered, like
maximum likelihood or \2 fitting procedures, as approximation of Bayesian
methods, when the (implicit) assumptions on which they are based are
reasonable.


14.2     Conservative or realistic uncertainty evaluation?

Finally, I would like to conclude with some remarks about safe (or conser­
vative) evaluation of the uncertainty. The normative rule of coherence
requires that all probabilistic statements should be consistent with the
beliefs. Therefore, if the uncertainty on a physical quantity is modelled
with a Gaussian distribution, and one publishes a result as, for example,
as = 0.119 ± 0.03, one should be no more nor less sure than 68% that
as is in that interval (and one should be 95% sure that the value is within
±0.06, and so on). If one feels more sure than 68 % this should be explicitly
stated, because the normal practice of physics is to publish standard un­
certainty in a normal probability model, as also recommended by the ISO
Guide [5]. In this respect, the ISO recommendation can be summarized
with the following quotation:
       "This Guide presents a widely applicable method for evaluating and
      expressing uncertainty in measurement.     It provides a realistic rather
      than a 'safe' value of uncertainty based on the concept that there is
      no inherent difference between an uncertainty component arising from a
      random effect and one arising from a correction for a systematic effect.
                          Conclusions and bibliography                               309


    The method stands, therefore, in contrast to certain older methods        that
    have the following two ideas in common:
     • The first idea is that the uncertainty reported should be 'safe' or
       'conservative' (...) In fact, because the evaluation of the uncertainty
       of a measurement result is problematic, it was often made deliberately
       large.
     • The second idea is that the influences that give rise to uncertainty
       were always recognizable as either 'random' or 'systematic' with the
       two being of different nature; (...) In fact, the method of combining
       uncertainty was often designed to satisfy the safety requirement.

    ... When the value of a measurand is reported, the best estimate of its
    value and the best estimate of the uncertainty of that estimate must be
    given, for if the uncertainty is to err, it is not normally possible to decide
    in which direction it should err safe. An understatement of uncertainties
    might cause too much trust to be placed in the values reported, with
    sometimes embarrassing and even disastrous consequences. A deliberate
    overstatement of uncertainty could also have undesirable repercussions."

T h e examples of the 'undesirable repercussions' given by the ISO Guide are
of the metrological type. In my opinion there are other physical reasons
which should be considered. Deliberately overstating uncertainty leads to
a better (but artificial) agreement between results and 'known' values or
results of other experiments. This prevents the identification of possible
systematic effects which could have biased the result and which can only
be identified by performing the measurement of the same physical quantity
with a different instrument, method, etc. (the so-called 'reproducibility
conditions'[5]). Behind systematic effects there is always some physics,
which can somehow be 'trivial' (noise, miscalibration, row approximations,
background, etc.), but also some new phenomenology. If the results of dif­
ferent experiments are far beyond their uncertainty the experimenters could
compare their methods, find systematic errors and, finally, the combined
result will be of a higher quality. In this respect, a last quotation from
Feynman is in order:

    "Well, QED is very nice and impressive, but when everything is so neatly
    wrapped up in blue bows, with all experiments in exact agreement with
    each other and with the theory - that is when one is learning absolutely
    nothing."
    "On the other hand, when experiments are in hopeless conflict - or when
    the observations do not make sense according to conventional ideas, or
    when none of the new models seems to work, in short when the situation
310            Bayesian   reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


      is an unholy mess - that is when one is really making hidden progress
      and a breakthrough is just around the corner!" [143]


14.3     Assessment of uncertainty is not a mathematical game

Finally, I would like to conclude with my favorite quotation concerning
measurement uncertainty, taken from the ISO Guide [3]:

       "Although this Guide provides a framework for assessing uncertainty,
      it cannot substitute for critical thinking, intellectual honesty, and pro­
      fessional skill. The evaluation of uncertainty is neither a routine task
      nor a purely mathematical one; it depends on detailed knowledge of the
      nature of the measurand and of the measurement. The quality and util­
      ity of the uncertainty quoted for the result of a measurement therefore
      ultimately depend on the understanding, critical analysis, and integrity
      of those who contribute to the assignment of its value."


14.4     Bibliographic note

The state of the art of Bayesian theory is summarized in Refs. [27] and
[43], where many references can be found. A comprehensive and eloquent
presentation of the Bayesian approach in scientific reasoning, covering philo­
sophical, mathematical and statistical aspects is given in Ref. [144], a short
account of which can be found in a "Nature" article [10]. Very interesting
and insightful philosophical and historical aspects of subjective probability
are provided in the introduction of Ref. [69]. Other interesting references
to get an idea of what present philosophers think about Bayesian theory
see also Refs. [145,146,147,148] and references therein. Eloquent 'defenses
of the Bayesian choice' can be found at the end of Refs.[58] and [144]. For
an excellent elementary introduction to Bayesian statistics, see Ref. [149].
A clear, concise mathematical presentation of de Finetti subjective proba­
bility can be found in the first chapter of Ref. [150]. Reference [29] provides
a little formal introduction to physicists, also stressing the importance of
teaching subjective probability and Bayesian statistics in the physics cur­
riculum.
    As classical books on subjective probability, de Finetti's and Jeffreys's
 "Theory of probability" [16] are a must (same title and no mention of
'Bayesian' in the title!). I found Ref. [151] particularly stimulating and
                        Conclusions   and bibliography                   311


Ref. [42] very convincing (the latter represents, in my opinion, the only
real introductory, calculus-based, textbook on subjective probability and
Bayesian statistics available so far, with many examples and exercises).
Unfortunately these two books are only available in Italian at the moment.
For Italian readers, I also recommend Refs. [152] and [153].
    I have consulted Refs. [154] and [155], which also contain many refer­
ences. References [48,49,57,58,75,156,157,158,159,160] are well-known
books among Bayesians. Some literature on Bayesian Networks can be
found in Ref. [120], which also contains interesting URLs. Reference [46]
is Bayesian book close to the physicist's point of view. For developments
on Bayesian theory and practical applications I recommend consulting the
proceedings of "Valencia Meetings" [161] and "Maxent Workshops" [93]. An
overview of maximum-entropy methods can also be found in Ref. [92], while
Ref. [108] is an unpublished cult book for those who adhere to the MaxEnt
school. Refs. [55,92] show some applications of Bayesian reasoning and
maximum entropy ideas in statistical mechanics. Ref. [162] show how these
ideas can be applied to spectrum analysis and time series (for the latter
subject, Ref. [163] is particularly recommended).
    Other information on Bayesian literature methods can be found on
web sites. As a starting point I would recommend Ref. [164], as well as
other sites dedicated to Bayesian networks and artificial intelligence [120].
Physicists will find interesting Tom Loredo's preprints and tutorials, and
references therein [165]. Interesting papers for physical and technological
applications can be found in Refs. [166,167].
    For an overview about numerical issues in Bayesian analysis Ref. [168]
is recommended. When integrals become complicated, the Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) technique becomes crucial: introductions and appli­
cations can be found, for example, in Refs. [75,125,169,170,171,172]. A
recent application of Bayesian methods in cosmology, which uses MCMC
and contains a pedagogical introduction too, can be found in Ref. [173].
    Some sources in the history of probability and statistics (from which,
for example I have taken the Laplace quote at the beginning of Chapter 7),
can be found in Ref. [174].
    The applied part of these notes, as well as the critical part, is mostly
original. References are given at the appropriate place in the text — only
those actually used have been indicated. A concise critical overview of
Bayesian reasoning versus frequentistic methods in physics can be found in
Ref. [30], whilst Ref. [33] is recommended to those who are still anxious
about priors.
312          Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical   introduction


    As far as measurement uncertainty is concerned, consultation of the
ISO Guide [5] is advised. At present the BIPM recommendations are also
followed by the American National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST), whose guidelines [7] are also on the web.

N o t e : For the reader's convenience, I have added the link to the electronic
version of the papers, whenever available, though in a preprint form. In par­
ticular, all references in the format xxx/yymmnnn (e.g. hep-ph/9512295 or
physics/9811046) are available at http://arxiv.org/abs/xxx/yymmnnii.
                                    Bibliography



  [1] G. D'Agostini, "Probability and measurement uncertainty in Physics - a
      Bayesian primer", Internal Report N. 1070 of the Dept. of Physics of
      the Rome University "La Sapienza", and DESY-95-242, December 1995.
      [hep-ph/9512295].
  [2] G. D'Agostini,      "Bayesian reasoning in High Energy Physics -
      principles and applications",              CERN Report 99-03, July 1999.
      [http: //www. romal. inf n. i t / ~ dagos/YR. html]
 [3] Deutsches Institut fur Normung (DIN), "Grunbegriffe der Messtechnick
      - Behandlung von Unsicherheiten bei der Auswertung von Messungen"
      (DIN 1319 Teile 1-4), Beuth Verlag GmbH, Berlin, Germany, 1985. Only
      parts 1-3 are published in English. An English translation of part 4 can
      be requested from the authors of Ref. [36]. Part 3 is going to be rewritten
      in order to be made in agreement with Ref. [5] (private communication
      from K. Weise).
  [4] R. Kaarls, BIPM proc.-Verb. Com. Int. Poids et Mesures 49 (1981), Al-
      A2 (in French);
      P. Giacomo, Metrologia 17 (1981) 73 (draft of English version; for the
      official BIPM translation see Refs. [5] or [7]).
  [5] International Organization for Standardization (ISO), "Guide to the ex­
      pression of uncertainty in measurement", Geneva, Switzerland, 1993.
  [6] International Organization for Standardization (ISO), "International vo­
      cabulary of basic and general terms in metrology", Geneva, Switzerland,
      1993.
  [7] B.N. Taylor and C.E. Kuyatt, "Guidelines for evaluating and expressing
      uncertainty of NIST measurement results", NIST Technical Note 1297,
      September 1994 [ h t t p : / / p h y s i c s . n i s t . g o v / P u b s / g u i d e l i n e s / o u t l i n e
       .html].
  [8] H. Poincare, "Science and Hypothesis", 1905 (Dover Publications, 1952).
  [9] H. Poincare, "Calcul des probabilites", University of Paris, 1893-94.
[10] C. Howson and P. Urbach, "Bayesian reasoning in science", Nature, Vol.
      350, 4 April 1991, p. 371.
[11] G. Zech, "Frequentist and Bayesian confidence limits", EPJdirect C12


                                                     313
314                Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical                        introduction


          (2002)         1       [http://www.edpsciences.com/articles/epjdirectc/abs/
         2 0 0 2 / c o n t e n t s .html].
  [12]   P. Clifford, "Interval estimation                    as viewed from the world of                       mathemat­
          ical statistics",         W o r k s h o p on Confidence Limits, Geneva, Switzerland,
         J a n u a r y 2000, C E R N R e p o r t 2000-005 [ h t t p : / / e p - d i v . w e b . c e r n . c h /
         ep-div/Events/CLW/papers .html].
  [13]   J . O . Berger a n d D.A. Berry, "Statistical analysis and the illusion of ob­
         jectivity",       A m . Scientist 7 6 (1988) 159.
  [14]   M.J. Schervish, "P values: what they are and what they are not", A m .
         S t a t . 5 0 (1996) 203.
  [15]   G. Cowan, "Statistical data analysis", C l a r e n d o n Press, Oxford, 1998.
  [16]   B . de F i n e t t i , "Theory of probability", J. Wiley & Sons, 1974.
  [17]   K. Baklawsky, M. Cerasoli a n d G.C. R o t a , "Introduzione alia Probabilita",
         Unione M a t e m a t i c a Italiana, 1984.
  [18]      www.desy.de/pr-info/desy-recent-hera-results-feb97_e.html,
          ("DESY Science Information                     on Recent HERA Results", Feb. 19, 1997).
  [19]   D E S Y ' 9 8 - Highlights from t h e D E S Y Research Center,                                         "Throwing
           'heads' seven times in a row - what if it was just a statistical                                        fluctua­
          tion?".
  [20]   Z E U S Collaboration, J. Breitweg et al., "Comparison                                    of ZEUS data with
         Standard Model predictions for e+p —> e + X scattering at high x and Q2 ",
         Z. P h y s . C 7 4 (1997) 207;
         H I Collaboration, C. Adloff et al., "Observation of events at very high Q2
          in ep collisions at HERA", Z. P h y s . C 7 4 (1997) 191.
  [21]   C. Tully in an interview t o Physics W e b , S e p t e m b e r 2000: "Higgs boson
         on t h e horizon", by V. Jamieson,
         http://PhysicsWeb.org/article/news/4/9/2/1.
  [22]   G. B u n c e , in BNL News Release "Physicists a n n o u n c e possible
         violation of s t a n d a r d model of particle physics", F e b r u a r y 2001,
         http://www.bnl.gov/bnlweb/pubaf/pr/bnlpr020801.htm.
  [23]   F N A L , Press P a s s November 7, 2001, "Neutrino M e a s u r e m e n t Surprises
         Fermilab Physicists",
         http://www.fnal.gov/pub/presspass/press_releases/NuTeV.html
  [24]   I. K a n t , "Prolegomena to any future metaphysics",                                1783.
  [25]   A. Einstein, "Autobiographisches",                         in "Albert Einstein:                     Philosopher-
          Scientist",        P.A. Schilpp ed., Library of Living Philosophers, Tudor,
         E v a n s t o n , 111., 1949, p p . 2-95.
  [26]   A. Einstein, "Uber die spezielle und die allgemeine                                            Relativitdtstheorie
          (gemeinverstandlich)",                Vieweg, Braunschweig, 1917. Translation:                              "The
          special and the general Theory. A popular exposition", London M e t h u e n
          1946.
  [27]   J . M . B e r n a r d o a n d A . F . M . S m i t h , "Bayesian theory", J o h n Wiley &: Sons,
          1994.
  [28]   D . H u m e , "Enquiry concerning human understanding"                                     (1748), see, e.g.,
         h t t p : //www . u t m . e d u / r e s e a r c h / h u m e / w r i / l e n q / l e n q - 6 . htm,.
  [29]    G. D'Agostini, "Teaching statistics in the physics curriculum.                                          Unifying
                                 Bibliography                                   315


       and clarifying role of subjective probability", Am. J. Phys. 67 (1999) 1260
       [physics/9908014].
[30]   G. D'Agostini, "Bayesian reasoning versus conventional statistics in
       high energy physics", Proc. XVIII International Workshop on Maxi­
       mum Entropy and Bayesian Methods, Garching (Germany), July 1998,
       V. Dose et al. eds., Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1999
       [physics/9811046].
[31]   G. D'Agostini, contribution to the panel discussion at Workshop on
       Confidence Limits, Geneva, Switzerland, January 2000, CERN Report
       2000-005 pp.285-286 [ep-div.web.cern.ch/ep-div/Events/CLW/QA/PS/
       clwdiscuss.ps].
[32]   G. D'Agostini, "Role and meaning of subjective probability: some com­
       ments on common misconceptions", XX International Workshop on Max­
       imum Entropy and Bayesian Methods in Science and Engineering, Gif-sur-
       Yvette (France), July 2000, A. Mohammad-Djafari, ed, AIP Conference
       Proceedings, Vol. 568, 2001 [physics/0010064].
[33]   G. D'Agostini, "Overcoming priors anxiety", Bayesian Methods in the
       Sciences, J. M. Bernardo Ed., special issue of Rev. Acad. Cien. Madrid,
       Vol. 93, Num. 3, 1999 [physics/9906048].
[34]   S.J. Press and J.M. Tanur, "The subjectivity of scientists and the Bayesian
       approach", John Wiley & Sons, 2001.
[35]   K. Weise, private communication, August 1995.
[36]   K. Weise, W. Woger, "A Bayesian theory of measurement           uncertainty",
       Meas. Sci. Technol. 4 (1993) 1.
[37]   H. O. Lancaster, "The Chi-squared Distribution", John Wiley & Sons,
       1969.
[38]   G. D'Agostini and G. Degrassi, "Constraints on the Higgs boson mass
       from direct searches and precision measurements", Eur. Phys. J. C10
       (1999) 633 [hep-ph/9902226].
[39]   P.-S. Laplace, "Theorie Analityque des Probabilites", 1812.
[40]   B. de Finetti, "Probabilita", entry for Enciclopedia Einaudi, 1980.
[41]   E. Schrodinger, "The foundation of the theory of probability - I", Proc. R.
       Irish Acad. 51A (1947) 51; reprinted in Collected papers Vol. 1 (Vienna
       1984: Austrian Academy of Science) 463.
[42]   R. Scozzafava, "La probabilita soggettiva e le sue applicazioni", Masson,
       Editoriale Veschi, Roma, 1993.
[43]   A. O'Hagan, "Bayesian Inference", Vol. 2B of Kendall's advanced theory
       of statistics (Halsted Press, 1994).
[44]   E.T. Jaynes, "Information theory and statistical mechanics", Phys. Rev.
       106 (1957) 620.
[45]   R.T. Cox, "Probability, Frequency and Reasonable Expectation" Am. J.
       Phys. 14 (1946) 1.
[46]   D.S. Sivia, "Data analysis - a Bayesian tutorial", Clarendon Press, Oxford
       University Press, 1997.
[47]   F.H. Frohner "Evaluation and Analysis of Nuclear Resonance Data",
       J E F F Report 18 (Nuclear Energy Agency and Organization for Eco-
316             Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical introduction


         nomic Co-operation and Development), 2000 [http://www.nea.fr/html/
         dbdata/nds_jefreports/jefreport-18/jeffl8.pdf]
  [48]   M. Tribus, "Rational descriptions, decisions and designs", Pergamon
         Press, 1969.
  [49]   H. Jeffreys, "Theory of probability", Oxford University Press, 1961.
  [50]   E. Schrodinger, "The foundation of the theory of probability - II", Proc. R.
         Irish Acad. 51A (1947) 141; reprinted in Collected papers Vol. 1 (Vienna
         1984: Austrian Academy of Science) 479.
  [51]   Particle Data Group (PDG), C. Caso et al., "Review of particle proper­
         ties", Phys. Rev. D 5 0 (1994) 1173.
  [52]   New Scientist, April 28 1995, pag. 18 ("Gravitational constant is up in
         the air"). The data of Table 3.2 are from H. Meyer's DESY seminar, June
         28, 1995.
  [53]   P. Watzlawick, J.H. Weakland and R. Fisch, "Change: principles of prob­
         lem formation and problem resolution", W.W. Norton, New York, 1974.
  [54]   R. von Mises, "Probability, Statistics, and Truth", Allen and Unwin, 1957.
  [55]   D.C. Knill and W. Richards (eds.), "Perception as Bayesian Inference",
         Cambridge University Press, 1996.
  [56]   C. Glymour, "Thinking things through: an introduction to philosophical
         issues and achievements", MIT Press, 1997.
  [57]   J.O. Berger, "Statistical decision theory and Bayesian analysis", Springer,
         1985.
  [58]   C.P. Robert, "The Bayesian choice", Springer, 1994.
  [59]   G. D'Agostini, "Confidence limits: what is the Problem? Is there the so­
         lution?", Workshop on Confidence Limits, Geneva, Switzerland, January
         2000, CERN Report 2000-005 [hep-ex/0002055].
  [60]   A.L. Read, "Modified frequentistic analysis of search results (the
         CLS method)", Workshop on Confidence Limits, Geneva, Switzerland,
         January 2000, CERN Report 2000-005 [ h t t p : / / e p - d i v . w e b . c e r n . c h /
         ep-div/Events/CLW/papers .html].
  [61]   P.L. Galison, "How experiments end", The University of Chicago Press,
         1987.
  [62]   G. D'Agostini, "Limits on electron compositeness from the Bhabha scatter­
         ing at PEP and PETRA ", Proceedings of the XXV Rencontre de Moriond
         on "Z° Physics", Les Arcs (France), March 4-11, 1990, p. 229 (also DESY-
         90-093).
  [63]   A.K. Wroblewski, "Arbitrariness in the development of physics", after-
         dinner talk at the International Workshop on Deep Inelastic Scattering
         and Related Subjects, Eilat, Israel, 6-11 February 1994, Ed. A. Levy
         (World Scientific, 1994), p. 478.
  [64]   C.E. Shannon, "A mathematical theory of communication", Bell System
         Tech. J. 27 (1948) 379, 623. Reprinted in the Mathematical Theory of
         Communication (C.E. Shannon and W. Weaver), Univ. Illinois Press,
         1949.
  [65]   R.E. Kalman, "A new approach to linear filtering and prediction prob­
         lems", Trans. ASME J. of Basic Engin. 82 (1960) 35.
                               Bibliography                                 317


[66] P.S. Maybaeck "Stochastic models, estimation and control", Vol. 1, Aca­
     demic Press, 1979.
[67] G. Welch and G. Bishop "An introduction to Kalman filter", 2002
     http://www.cs.unc. edu/~welch/kalman/.
[68] C.F. Gauss, "Theoria motus corporum coelestium in sectionibus conicis
     solem ambientum", Hamburg 1809, n.i 172-179; reprinted in Werke, Vol.
     7 (Gota, Gottingen, 1871), pp 225-234.
[69] F. Lad, "Operational subjective statistical methods - a mathematical,
     philosophical, and historical introduction", J. Wiley & Sons, 1996.
[70] G. Coletti and R. Scozzafava, "Probabilistic logic in a coherent setting",
     Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002.
[71] T. Bayes, "An assay towards solving a problem in the doctrine of chances",
     Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc, 53 (1763) 370
[72] P. Astone and G. Pizzella, "Upper limits in the case that zero events
     are observed: An intuitive solution to the background dependence puz­
     zle", Workshop on Confidence Limits, Geneva, Switzerland, January 2000,
     CERN Report 2000-005 [hep-ex/0002028],
[73] G.J. Feldman and R.D. Cousins, "Unified approach to the classi­
     cal statistical analysis of small signal", Phys. Rev. D 5 7 (1998) 3873
     [physics/9711021],
[74] J. Orear, "Enrico Fermi, the man", II Nuovo Saggiatore 17, no. 5-6 (2001)
     30
[75] A. Gelman, J.B. Carlin, H.S. Stern and D.B. Rubin, "Bayesian data anal­
     ysis", Chapman k. Hall, 1995.
[76] D.G.T Denison, C.C. Holmes, B.K. Mallick and A.F.M. Smith, "Bayesian
     methods for nonlinear classification and regression", Jonh Wiley and Sons,
     2002.
[77] G. D'Agostini, "Inferring ~p and rj of the CKM matrix - A simplified,
     intuitive approach", May 2001, hep-ex/0107067.
[78] M. Ciuchini et al. "2000 CKM-Triangle Analysis: A critical review with
     updated experimental inputs and theoretical parameters", JHEP 0107
     (2001) 013 [hep-ph/0012308].
[79] Particle Data Group (PDG), C. Caso et al., "Review of particle physics",
     Eur. Phys. J. C 3 (1998) 1 ( h t t p : / / p d g . l b l . g o v / ) .
[80] G. D'Agostini, "On the use of the covariance matrix to fit correlated data",
     Nucl. Instrum. Methods. A346 (1994) 306.
[81] CELLO Collaboration, H.J. Behrend et al., "Determination of as and
     sin 0W from measurements of total hadronic cross section in e+e~ anni­
     hilation", Phys. Lett. 183B (1987) 400.
[82] G. D'Agostini, "Determination of as and sin2 6w from R measurements
     at PEP and PETRA", Proceedings of XXII Rencontre de Moriond on
     "Hadrons, Quarks and Gluons", Les Arcs, France, March 15-25, 1987.
[83] S. Chiba and D.L. Smith, "Impacts of data transformations on least-
     square solutions and their significance in data analysis and evaluation",
     J. Nucl. Sc. Tech. 31 (1994) 770.
[84] M. L. Swartz, "Reevaluation of the hadronic contribution to Q ( M | ) " ,
318          Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical introduction


        Phys. Rev. D 5 3 (1996) 5268 [hep-ph/9509248].
   [85] T. Takeuchi, "The status of the determination of a(Mz) and         as(Mz)",
        Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl. 123 (1996) 247 [hep-ph/9603415].
  [86] S. Forte, J.I. Latorre, L. Magnea and A. Piccione, "Determination of
        a3 from scaling violations of truncated moments of structure functions",
        Nucl. Phys. B643 (2002) 477 [hep-ph/0205286].
   [87] V. Blobel, "Unfolding methods in high energy physics experiments", Pro­
        ceedings of the "1984 CERN School of Computing", Aiguablava, Catalo­
        nia, Spain, 9-12 September 1984, Published by CERN, July 1985, pp.
        88-127.
   [88] G. Zech, "Comparing statistical data to Monte Carlo simulation - param­
        eter fitting and unfolding", DESY 95-113, June 1995.
  [89] G. D'Agostini, "A multidimensional unfolding method based on Bayes'
        theorem", Nucl. Instrum. Methods A362 (1995) 487.
  [90] K. Weise, "Mathematical foundation of an analytical approach to Bayesian
        Monte Carlo spectrum unfolding", Physicalish Technische Bundesanstalt,
        Braunschweig, BTB-N-24, July 1995.
  [91] S.F. Gull and J. Skilling, "Quantifying Maximum Entropy", manual of
        MemSys5 package, http://wuw.maxent.co.uk/documents_l.htm.
  [92] B. Buck and V.A. Macauly (eds.), "Maximum Entropy in action", Oxford
        University Press, 1991.
  [93] International Workshops on Maximum Entropy and Bayesian Methods
        (22 editions till 2002), proceedings often published by Kluwer Academic
        Publishers. See also http://omega.albany.edu:8008/maxent .html
  [94] K.M. Hanson, "Introduction to Bayesian image analysis, Medical Imag­
        ing: Image Processing M.H. Loew ed., Proc. SPIE 1898 (1993) 716
        [http://public. lanl.gov/kmh/publications/medim93.  pdf\.
  [95] G. Polya, "Mathematics and plausible reasoning", Volume II: Patterns of
        plausible inference, Princeton University Press, 1968.
  [96] A. Franklin, Experiment, right or wrong", Cambridge University Press,
        1990.
  [97] D.A. Berry, "Teaching elementary Bayesian statistics with real applica­
        tions in science", Am. Stat. 51 (1997) 241;
        J. Albert, "Teaching Bayes' rule: a data-oriented approach", ibid., p. 247.
        D.S. Moore, "Bayes for beginners? Some reasons to hesitate", ibid., p.
        254. Pages 262-272 contain five discussions plus replies.
  [98] K.S. Thome, "Black holes and time warps: Einstein's outrageous legacy",
        W.W. Norton & Company, 1994.
  [99] M. De Maria and A. Russo, "The discovery of the positron", Rivista di
        Storia della Scienza, 2 (1985) 237.
 [100] See e.g. Y.L. Dokshitzer, "DIS 96/97. Theory/Developments", Proc. 5th
        International Workshop on Deep Inelastic Scattering and QCD, Chicago,
        April 1997, J. Repond and D. Krakauer eds. (AIP Conf. Proc. 407)
        [hep-ph/9706375].
 [101] See e.g. G. Altarelli, "The status of the Standard Model", talk at 18th
        International Symposium on Lepton-Photon Interactions, Hamburg, Au-
                                                 Bibliography                                                         319


      gust 1997, CERN-TH-97-278, Oct. 1997 [hep-ph/9710434].
[102] R. Feynman, "The character of the physical law", The MIT Press, 1967
[103] B. Efron, "Why isn't everyone a Bayesian?", Am. Stat. 40 (1986) 1, with
      discussion on pages 6-11.
[104] D.V. Lindley, comment to Ref. [103], Am. Stat. 40 (1986) 6.
[105] A. Zellner, "Bayesian solution to a problem posed by Efron", Am. Stat.
      40 (1986) 330.
[106] B. Efron, reply to Ref. [105], Am. Stat. 40 (1986) 331.
[107] J.M. Bernardo, "Non-informative priors do not exist", J. Stat. Plan, and
      Inf. 65 (1997) 159, including discussions by D.R. Cox, A.P. Dawid, J.K.
      Ghosh and D. Lindley, pp. 177-189.
[108] E.T. Jaynes, "Probability theory: the logic of science", book in prepara­
      tion, see http://omega.albany.edu:8008/JaynesBook.html .
[109] G. Zech, "Objections to the unified approach to the computation of classi­
      cal confidence limits", physics/9809035 (see Ref. [11] for more extensive
      argumentations).
[110] R.D. Cousins, "Why isn't every physicist a Bayesian?", Am. J. Phys. 63
      (1995) 398.
[Ill] G. Feldman, Panel Discussion at Workshop on Confidence Limits,
      Geneva, Switzerland, January 2000, CERN Report 2000-005, p. 277.
      [http: / / e p - d i v . web. cern. ch/ep-div/Events/CLW/papers. html].
[112] G. Gabor (gaborQis.dal.ca), private communication, 1999.
[113] A. de Rujula, "Snapshots of the 1985 high energy physics panorama",
      Proc. of the International Europhysics Conference on High-Energy
      Physics, Bari (Italy), July 1995, L. Nitti and G. Preparata eds.
[114] G. Salvini, Welcome address to the International Workshop on Deep
      Inelastic Scattering and related phenomena, Roma (Italy), April 1996;
      World Scientific, 1997, G. D'Agostini and A. Nigro eds.
[115] J.O. Berger and W.H. Jefferys, "Sharpening Ockham's razor on a
      Bayesian strop", Am. Scientist 89 (1992) 64 and Journal of the Italian
      Statistical Society 1 (1992) 17
      [http: / / q u a s a r . a s . u t e x a s . edu/Papers. html].
[116] T.J. Loredo and D.Q. Lamb, Bayesian analysis of neutrinos observed from
      supernova SN 1987A, Phys. Rev. D 6 5 (2002) 063002 [atro-ph/0107260].
[117] M.V. John and J.V. Narlikar, "Comparison of cosmological models using
      Bayesian theory", Phys.Rev. D 6 5 (2002) 043506 [astro-ph/0111122].
[118] M.P. Hobson, S.L. Bridle and O. Lahav, "Combining cosmo­
      logical datasets:               hyperparameters and Bayesian evidence", 2002,
      astro-ph/0203259.
[119] C.E. Rasmussen and Z. Ghahramani, "Occam's Razor", Neural Infor­
      mation Processing Systems 13 (2001) [http://www.gatsby.ucl.ac.uk/
      ~ z o u b i n / p a p e r s . html],
      see also h t t p : / / w w w . g a t s b y . u c l . a c . u k / ~ z o u b i n / t a l k s / c m u - t a l k . p d f .
[120] See, e.g, J. Pearl, "Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: networks
      of plausible inference", Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1988.
      F.V. Jensen, "An introduction to Bayesian networks", UCL Press (and
320                Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical                          introduction


         Springer Verlag), 1996.
         D . H e c k e r m a n a n d M.P. W e l l m a n , "Bayesian Networks",                               Communica­
         tions of t h e A C M (Association for C o m p u t i n g M a c h i n e r y ) , Vol. 38, No.
         3, M a r c h 1995, p. 27.
         L. Burnell a n d E. Horvitz, "Structure and chance: melding logic and prob­
         ability for software debugging", ibid., p . 3 1 .
         R. F u n g a n d B . Del Favero, "Applying Bayesian networks to                                        Information
         retrieval", ibid., p . 42.
         D . H e c k e r m a n , J.S. Breese a n d K. R o m m e l s e , "Decision-theoretic                            trou­
         bleshooting", ibid., p . 49.
         R . G . Cowell, A.P. Dawid, S.L. L a u r i t z e n a n d D.J. Spiegelhalter "Proba­
         bilistic Networks and Expert Systems", Springer Verlag, 1999.
         http://www.auai.org/
         http://bayes.stat.Washington.edu/almond/belief.html.
 [121]   J . B . K a d a n e a n d D.A. Schum, "A Probabilistic analysis of the Sacco and
          Vanzetti evidence", J. Wiley a n d Sons, 1996.
         P. G a r b o l i n o a n d F . Taroni, "Evaluation                      of scientific          evidence       using
         Bayesian networks", Forensic Science I n t e r n a t i o n a l 1 2 5 (2002) 149, a n d
         references therein.
 [122]   F . B C o z m a n , "JavaBayes version 0.346 - Bayesian networks in Java",
         J a n u a r y 2001, h t t p : / / w w w - 2 . c s . c m u . e d u / ~ j a v a b a y e s / H o m e /
 [123]   h t t p : //www. r o m a l . i n f n . i t / ~ d a g o s / b n /
 [124]   D . J . Spiegelhalter, A. T h o m a s a n d N . G . Best (et al.), "Bayesian                              inference
          Using Gibbs               Sampling",
         W . R . Gilks, S. Richardson a n d D . J . Spiegelhalter, "Markov Chain Monte
          Carlo Methods in Practice", C h a p m a n a n d Hall, 1996.
         http://www.mrc-bsu.cam.ac.uk/bugs/welcome.shtml.
 [125]   h t t p : //www. s t a t s l a b . cam. a c . u k / ~ m c m c /
 [126]   N A 48 Collaboration, J . R . Batley a n d al., "A precise measurement                                       of di­
         rect CP violation in the decay of neutral kaons into two pions", P h y s . L e t t
         B 5 4 4 (2002) 97 [hep-ex/0208009].
 [127]   G. D'Agostini, "Sceptical combination                          of experimental               results:      General
         considerations             and application to e'/e", C E R N - E P / 9 9 - 1 3 9 , O c t o b e r 1999,
         h e p - e x / 9 9 1 0 0 3 6 , and references therein.
 [128]   M. Fabbrichesi, "Estimating                    ef/e. A user's manual", Nucl. P h y s . P r o c .
         Suppl. 8 6 (2000) 322 [hep-ph/9909224].
 [129]   V. Dose a n d W . von der Linden, "Outlier tolerant parameter                                                  esti­
         mation",           P r o c . of t h e X V I I I I n t e r n a t i o n a l W o r k s h o p on M a x i m u m
         E n t r o p y a n d Bayesian M e t h o d s , Garching ( G e r m a n y ) , J u l y 1998,
         V. Dose et al. eds., Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1999
         [ h t t p : //www. i p p . m p g . d e / O P / D a t e n a n a l y s e / P u b l i c a t i o n s / ] .
 [130]   W . H . Press, "Understanding                 data better with Bayesian and global statis­
         tical methods", Conference on Some Unsolved P r o b l e m s in Astrophysics,
         P r i n c e t o n , N J , 27-29 Apr 1995 [ a s t r o - p h / 9 6 0 4 1 2 6 ] .
 [131]   C. P a s c a u d a n d F . Zomer, "QCD analysis from the proton                                           structure
         function          F2 measurement:            issues on fitting, statistical                    and       systematic
                                          Bibliography                                                321


        errors", LAL 95-05, June 1995 [http://www-hl.desy.de/hlwork/fit/
        hlfit.info.html].
[132]   S. Alekhin, "Extraction of parton distributions and as from DIS data
        within the Bayesian treatment of systematic errors", Eur. Phys. J. C10
        (1999) 395 [hep-ph/9611213].
[133]   M. Botje, "A QCD analysis of HERA and fixed target structure
        function data", ZEUS Note 98-062 DESY-99-038, December 1999
        [hep-ph/9912439],
[134]   R.S. Thorne et al. "Questions on uncertainties in parton distributions'',
        Conference on Advanced Statistical Techniques in Particle Physics, March
        2002, Durham, hep-ph/0205233.
[135]   H. Wahl (CERN), private communication, 1999.
[136]   G. D'Agostini and M. Raso, "Uncertainties due to imperfect knowledge
        of systematic effects: general considerations and approximate formulae",
        CERN-EP/2000-026, February 2000 [hep-ex/0002056].
[137]   P. Astone and G. D'Agostini, "Inferring the intensity of Poisson processes
        at the limit of the detector sensitivity (with a case study on gravitational
        wave burst search)", CERN-EP/99-126, August 1999 [hep-ex/9909047].
[138]   P. Astone at al., "Search for correlation between GRB's detected by Bep-
        poSAX and gravitational wave detectors EXPLORER and NAUTILUS",
        Phys. Rev. 66 (2002) 102002 [astro-ph/0206431].
[139]   T.J. Loredo, "The promise of Bayesian inference for astrophysics", Proc.
        Statistical Challenges in Modern Astronomy, E.D. Feigelson and G.J.
        Babu eds., Springer-Verlag (1992) 275 [ h t t p : / / a s t r o s u n . t n . C o r n e l l .
        e d u / s t a f f / l o r e d o / b a y e s / t j l . h t m l ] . This web site contains also other
        interesting tutorials, papers and links on Bayesian analysis.
[140]   ZEUS Collaboration, "Search for eeqq contact interactions in deep in­
        elastic e+p -> e+X scattering at HERA", Eur. Phys. J C 1 4 (2000) 239
        [hep-ex/9905039].
[141]   CELLO Collaboration, H.J. Behrend et al., "Search for substructures of
        leptons and quark with CELLO detector", Z. Phys. C51 (1991) 149.
[142]   G. D'Agostini and G. Degrassi, "Constraining the Higgs boson mass
        through the combination of direct search and precision measurement re­
        sults", Contribution to the Workshop on "Confidence Limits", CERN,
        Geneva, 17-18 January 2000 [hep-ph/0001269].
[143]   R. Feynman, 1973 Hawaii Summer Institute, cited by D. Perkins at the
        1995 EPS Conference, Brussels.
[144]   C. Howson and P. Urbach, "Scientific reasoning - the Bayesian approach",
        Open Court, 1993 (second edition).
[145]   J. Earman, "Bayes or bust1? A critical examination of Bayesian confir­
        mation theory", The MIT Press, 1992.
[146]   R. Jeffrey, "Probabilistic thinking", 1995, http://www.princeton.edu/
        ~bayesway/ProbThink/
[147]   M. Kaplan, "Decision theory as philosophy", Cambridge University Press,
        1996.
[148]   R. Jeffrey, "Subjective Probability (The Real Thing)", 2002 http://www.
322                Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical                          introduction


         p r i n c e t o n . e d u / ~ b a y e s w a y / B o o k * . p d f . R e l a t e d essays can b e found at
         h t t p : //www. p r i n c e t o n . e d u / ~ b a y e s w a y / .
 [149]   J.M. Bernardo,                     "Bayesian          statistics",        U N E S C O Encyclopedia of
         Life S u p p o r t S y s t e m s ( E O L S S ) [ f t p : / / m a t h e r o n . u v . e s / p u b / p e r s o n a l /
         bernardo/BayesStat.pdf].
 [150]   F . Spizzichino, "Subjective probability models for lifetimes",                                    Boca R a t o n
         C h a p m a n & H a l l / C R C , 2001.
 [151]   B . de F i n e t t i , "Filosofia della probabilita", il Saggiatore, 1995.
 [152]   L. Piccinato, "Metodi per le decisioni statistiche",                                Springer-Italia, 1996.
 [153]   D . C o s t a n t i n i e P. Monari (eds.), "Probabilita e giochi d'azzardo", Franco
         Muzzio E d i t o r e , 1996.
 [154]   R. L. Winkler, "An introduction                              to Bayesian         inference and          decision",
         Holt, R i n e h a r t a n d W i n s t o n , Inc., 1972.
 [155]   S. J. Press, "Bayesian                    statistics:       principles,        models, and          applications",
         J o h n Wiley & Sons, 1989.
 [156]   G.E.P. Box a n d G.C. Tiao, "Bayesian inference in statistical                                          analysis",
         J o h n Wiley a n d Sons, 1973.
 [157]   A. O ' H a g a n , "Probability: methods and measurements",                                C h a p m a n & Hall,
         1988.
 [158]   P.M. Lee, "Bayesian statistics - an introduction",                                  J o h n Wiley a n d Sons,
         1997.
 [159]   L.J. Savage et al., "The foundations                           of statistical inference: a discussion",
         M e t h u e n , 1962.
 [160]   A. Zellner, "Bayesian analysis in econometrics                                    and statistics",        Eduard
         Elgar, 1997.
 [161]   J . M . B e r n a r d o et al., Valencia Meetings on "Bayesian Statistics"                                    1-6,
         http://www.uv.es/~bernardo/valenciam.html .
 [162]   G.L. B r e t t h o r s t "Bayesian spectrum analysis and parameter                                    estimation",
         Springer Verlag, 1988 [ h t t p : / / b a y e s . w u s t l . e d u / g l b / b o o k . p d f ] .
 [163]   A. Pole, M. West a n d P.J. Harrison "Applied Bayesian                                                  Forecast­
         ing and Time Series Analysis",                              1994, C h a p m a n - H a l l . More informa­
         tion a n d r e l a t e d software can b e found at h t t p : / / w w w . i s d s . d u k e . e d u /
         ~mw/books_sof t w a r e _ d a t a . h t m l .
 [164]    http://www.bayesian.org/
         http://www.amstat.org/sections/SBSS/
         http://bayes.stat.Washington.edu/bayes-people.html
         http://www.ar-tiste.com/blip.html
         http://www.strauss.lanl.gov/Welcome.html
         http://fourier.dur.ac.uk:8000/stats/bayeslin/
         http://astrosun.tn.Cornell.edu/staff/loredo/bayes/.
 [165]      http://astrosun.tn.cornell.edu/staff/loredo/bayes/tjl.html
 [166]   h t t p : //www. i p p . m p g . d e / O P / D a t e n a n a l y s e /
         http://public.lanl.gov/kmh/publications/publications.html
 [167]   U n c e r t a i n t y Quantification W o r k i n g G r o u p , h t t p : / / p u b l i c . l a n l . g o v /
         kmh/uncertainty/
 [168]   A . F . M . S m i t h , "Bayesian numerical analysis", Phil. T r a n s . R. Soc. Lon-
                                 Bibliography                                    323


      don 337 (1991) 369.
[169] R.M. Neal, "Probabilistic inference using Markov Chain Monte Carlo
      Methods", Technical Report CRG-TR-93-1, University of Toronto, 1993,
      ftp://ftp.cs.utoront.ca/pub/radford/review.pdf.
[170] W.R. Gillks, S. Richardson and D.J. Spiegelhalter "Markov Chain Monte
      Carlo in practice", Chapman and Hall, 1996.
[171] R.E. Kass, B.P. Caxlin, A. Gelman and R.M. Neal, "Markov Chain Monte
      Carlo in practice: A roundtable discussion", Am. Stat. 52 (1998) 93
      [http: //www. amstat. o r g / p u b l i c a t i o n s / t a s / k a s s . pdf].
[172] K.M. Hanson, "Tutorial on Markov Chain Monte Carlo", XX In­
      ternational Workshop on Maximum Entropy and Bayesian Meth­
      ods in Science and Engineering, Gif-sur-Yvette (France), July 2000,
      http://public.lanl.gov/kmh/talks/maxentOOb.pdf
[173] A. Lewis and S. Bridle, "Cosmological parameters from CMB and
      other data: a Monte-Carlo approach", Phys. Rev. D66 (2002) 103511
      [astro-ph/0205436].
[174] h t t p : / / c e r e b r o . xu. edu/math/Sources/.
This page is intentionally left blank
                                     Index



Ax 2 = 1 rule, 170, 269-271                       networks, 241, 242, 244, 246
A l n £ = 1/2 rule, 269                        Bernardo J.M., 223
3 a rule, 236                                  Bernoulli J., 52
                                               Bernoulli's theorem, 113, 148-150
AIDS test problem                              Berry D.A., 218, 232
  formulation, 20                              Bertrand paradox, 121, 122
  solution, 82                                 bet
Anderson C D . , 218                              and probability, 29
approximate methods, 39, 41, 46                   coherent, 54
arbitrariness and subjectivism, 30                coherent bet, 29
Aristoteles, 229                                  odds, 54
Astone P., 166                                 beta distribution, 97
asymmetric uncertainty, 267                    betting odds, 55
average, 32, 90, 93                            binomial
  distribution, 111                               distribution, 91
  probability, 9                                  likelihood, 41, 141
axioms of probability, 29                      BIPM, 181
                                                  recommendation INC-1, 31
background in counting experiments,            black hole, 218
  165                                          blending factor, 126
Basu S., 233                                   bound
Bayes factor, 72, 82, 239, 296                    probabilistic, 299, 301
Bayes T., 52                                      sensitivity, 299, 301
Bayes' theorem, 32, 36, 63-65, 99              branching ratio, 141
   criticism of 'conventional use', 67
Bayesian, 32                                   CELLO, 199
   estimators, 226                             central limit theorem, 110-113, 183,
   inference, 34, 116                            187
   networks, 241, 242, 244, 246                  terms, 108
   statistics, 68                              chi-square
belief                                            Ax 2 = 1 rule, 170, 269-271
   degree of, 29, 32, 53                         distribution, 96

                                         325
326            Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical introduction


   minimization (fit), 170, 269-271          de Finetti B., 3, 26, 27, 51, 55, 60, 88,
   test, 236                                   142, 150, 225
coherence, 29, 55, 213, 216, 226               representation theorem, 28
coherent bet, 54                             de Rujula A., 238
Coletti G., 225                              decision theory, 76
combination of results                       deduction, 34
   binomial model, 146                       degree of belief, 29, 32, 53
   Gaussian model, 125, 247                  Descartes' cogito, 26
   outliers, 247                             deterministic law, 5
   Poisson model, 158-162                    DIN, 115
   sceptical combination, 252-254            dog-hunter, 12, 119
combinatorial 'definition' of                Dose V., 253
  probability, 30
complete class, 58                           edge of physical region
conditional inference, 44                       measurement at the, 12, 128
conditional probability, 60-62, 215,         efficiencies, 42
   216                                       Efron B., 221
conditioning, 32                             Einstein A., 25, 26, 30
confidence (probability), 73                 empirical law of chance, 150
confidence interval (frequentistic), 11,     entropy, 82
   232                                       equiprobability, 52
conjugate prior, 126                         error, 4, 5, 115, 116
   binomial likelihood, 146                     normal distributed, 41
   Gaussian likelihood, 126                     statistical, 8
   Poisson likelihood, 155                      systematic, 8, 43
contradiction                                events, 53
   proof by, 15                              evidence, 239, 240
correlation                                  exchangeability, 28, 142
   between events, 63                        expected gain, 76
   coefficient, 99                           expected value, 90, 93, 99
   due to common systematics, 192            exponential distribution, 95
   due to systematics, 133, 134,
            179-181, 193, 195                falsification scheme, 34
correlation matrix, 101                      falsificationism, 76
counting experiments, 141                    Fermi E., 171
covariance, 99                               Feynman R., 51, 220
   matrix                                    final probability, 65
         misuse in fits, 197                 finite partition, 58
         of experimental results, 192,       Fisher R.A., 172
            193, 195                         fit, 172-174
covariance matrix, 101                       Franklin A., 217
coverage, 229-231, 301                       fuzzy logic, 26
Cox R . T , 57
credibility interval, 124                    Gabor G.
cumulative function, 90, 93                    a Socratic exchange, 232, 233
Cygnus X-l, 218                              Galilei G., 211
                                    Index                                    327


Galison P., 218                             Jaynes E., 57
gamma distribution, 95                         Jaynes' robot, 223
Gauss K.F., 52, 137-139, 172                Jeffreys H., 57, 221
Gaussian                                       priors, 223, 290-293
  distribution, 94
  distribution of error, 112                Kalman filter, 126
  Gauss derivation, 137-139                 Kant I., 25, 26
  likelihood, 41, 123                       kurtosis, 185, 279
gold/silver ring problem
  Bayesian network solution, 242,           Lad F., 225
           244, 246                         Laplace P.-S., 30, 51, 52, 141, 225
  formulation, 67                              recursive formula, 144
  solution, 83                                 rule of succession, 144
good sense, 52                              laws of large numbers, 113
gravitational constant, 59                  learning by experience, 68
                                            least squares, 39, 40, 170
Hawking S., 218                             likelihood, 35, 36
HERA 'events', 21, 220                         A X 2 = 1 rule, 269
hidden variables, 30                           binomial, 41
Higgs boson, 78                                closed, 285, 302
  claim of discovery, 23                       Gaussian, 41, 123
Howson C., 11                                  maximumsee mximum likelihood,
Hume D., 25, 26, 28, 33                                 170
hunter-dog, 12, 119                            open, 285, 302
hypotheses                                     Poisson, 41
  probability of, 19                           principle, 170, 229, 236
hypothesis                                  Linden W. von der, 253
  test (frequentistic), 15, 233             linear fit, 172-174
                                            linearization, 178
implication, 58                             logical product, 58
improper priors, 127                        logical sum, 58
independence, 63                            lower limit
indifference principle, 81                     binomial model, 145
indirect measurements, 42
induction, 32, 34                           Mach E., 26
influence quantity, 43, 116, 117            marginalization, 98
information entropy, 82                     maximum bounds, 8
initial probability, 65                     Maximum Entropy, 57, 82
innovation, 126                             maximum entropy, 223
input quantity, 273                         maximum likelihood, 39, 40, 118, 122,
intersubjectivity, 31                         169, 170
ISO, 5, 115, 181                            mean, 90, 93
   Guide, 5, 31, 53, 308, 310               measurand, 6
                                            Millikan R., 252
Jacobian, 105                               mode, 32
JavaBayes, 242, 243                         moments, 91
328           Bayesian reasoning in data analysis: A critical introduction


  central, 91                               priors, 36-38, 40, 65, 120, 125, 126
Moore D., 222                                  conjugate, 126
multinomial distribution, 40, 103              logical necessity, 37, 238
                                               motivated by 'positive attitude',
negative mass, 12, 128                                  131
Newton I., 72                                  non-informative, 223
non-informative priors, 223                    objective, 223
normal, see Gaussian                        probabilistic law, 4
null hypothesis, 15                         probability
null observation, 154                          "does not exists", 60
                                               axioms, 29, 55
objective Bayesian theory, 222                 basic rules, 29, 55
objective inference, 223                       classical, 52
objectivity of physics, 216-218                classical view, 27
Ockham' Razor, 239, 240                        combinatorial definition, 51
odds in betting, 54                            concepts, 27
operational subjectivism, 225                  conditional, 60-62
Orear J., 171                                  density function, 32, 92
outliers, 247                                  distribution
output quantity, 273                                 beta, 97
                                                     binomial, 91
p-value, 16                                          bivariate Gaussian, 101
Particle Data Group (PDG), 213,                      chi-square, 96
  221, 248, 259, 260, 268, 269                       conditional, 98
particle identification, 66                          Erlang, 96
Pauli W., 51                                         exponential, 95
Pearson chi-square, 40, 96, 103                      gamma, 95
Peelle's Pertinent Puzzle, 202                       Gaussian, 94, 185, 187
penalization, 55                                     marginal, 98
Pizzella G., 166                                     multinomial, 40, 103
Poincare H , 11, 25, 30, 38, 115, 238                normal, see Gaussian
Poisson                                              Poisson, 92
   distribution, 92                                  triangular, 97, 185, 187
   likelihood, 41, 152                               triangular asymmetric, 185,
   process, 95, 287                                     187
Polya G., 213                                        uniform, 94, 185, 187
Popper K.R., 34, 76                            favorable over possible cases, 51
positive attitude (of researchers), 131,       frequentistic definition, 51
   293                                         frequentistic view, 27
posterior, 65                                  function, 32, 90
predictive distribution                        inversion, 10, 14
   binomial likelihood, 151                    Laplace 'definition', 30, 52
   Gaussian likelihood, 127                    logical view, 27
   Poisson likelihood, 155                     objective, 28
prevision, 17, 124                             of causes, 11, 34
prior knowledge, 33                            of hypotheses, 19, 77
                                       Index                                     329


   of observations, 77                         systematic error, 8, 43
   standard 'definitions', 30                    correlation, 133, 134
   statistical view, 27                          linearization, 178-181
   subjective, 28, 29, 52, 58                    normalization, 195
proof by contradiction, 15                       of known size, 133
propagation of uncertainties, 8, 42,             offset, 131, 193
  44, 104-108, 191                               Poisson model, 162
   linearization, 178-181, 276-278
   non-monotonic case, 282                     tail, probability of, 22
   nonlinear, 273, 278, 279                    Thorne K., 218
proportions, 42                                top quark, 59
                                               Tribus M., 82
quantum mechanics, 29                          true value, 5-7
                                                  probability of, 9
random variables, 31, 89                       type A uncertainty, 133, 181
relative belief updating ratio, 296            type B uncertainty, 133, 181-184, 186
repeatability, 7
reproductive property, 111                     uncertain numbers, 31, 89
                                               uncertainty, 4, 5, 115, 116
Salvini G., 237                                  'standard' treatment, 7
Schrodinger E., 53, 57, 60, 142, 225             asymmetric, 267
Scozzafava R., 225                               propagation, 8, 42, 44, 104-108,
sensitivity                                              191, 268
   analysis, 71, 188, 303                        source, 3
   bound, 299, 301                               sources (ISO), 6
   coefficient, 108                            uncertainty and probability, 29
sets                                           unfolding, 203-206, 208
   properties, 56                              uniform distribution, 94
   versus events, 58                           upper limit
shape distortion function, 296                   binomial model, 145
signal to noise ratio, 66                        Poisson model, 154, 157-164, 166
significance                                   Urbach P., 11
   level, 15
   probabilities, 16                           variance, 32, 90, 99
   statistical, 19                             Venn diagrams, 56
skewness, 185, 279                             von Mises R., 67, 213
smearing, 204
Smith A.F.M., 221, 223                         Weise K., 182
standard deviation, 32, 91                     Wittgenstein L., 13
standard statistical methods
   recovering, 39                              Zech G., 229
statistical effects, 7                         Zellner A., 221
statistical error, 8                           Zeno's paradox, 92
statistical significance, 19
supersymmetric particles, 59
systematic effects, 7
                                      Bayesian Reasoning in
                                              Data Analysis
                                                A C r i t i c a l Introduction

                                              This book provides a multi-level
                                              introduction to Bayesian reasoning (as
                                              opposed to "conventional statistics") and
                                              its applications to data analysis. The basic
                                              ideas of this " n e w " a p p r o a c h to the
                                              quantification of uncertainty are presented
                                              using examples from research and everyday
                                              life. A p p l i c a t i o n s c o v e r e d i n c l u d e :
                                              parametric inference; combination of results;
                                              treatment of uncertainty due to systematic
                                              errors and background; comparison of
                                              hypotheses; unfolding of experimental
                                              d i s t r i b u t i o n s ; u p p e r / l o w e r b o u n d s in
                                              frontier-type measurements. Approximate
                                              methods for routine use are derived and
                                              are shown often to coincide — under well-
                                              defined assumptions! — with "standard"
                                              methods, which can therefore be seen as
                                              special cases of the more general Bayesian
                                              methods. In dealing with uncertainty in
                                              measurements, modern metrological ideas
                                              are utilized, including the ISO classification
                                              of uncertainty into type A and type B. These
                                              are shown to fit well into the Bayesian
                                              framework.



Giulio D'Agostini is an experimental particle physicist and an associate professor at the University
of Rome " La Sapienza". He has collaborated in large frontier-type experiments at the international
laboratories of CERN and DESY, working on various aspects of the construction and the
operation of detectors, and analysing the resulting data. He has also performed several re-
analyses of data produced by other experiments. Physics topics to which he has contributed
include: study of the force between quarks and gluons; quark fragmentation; heavy quark decay;
proton and photon structure functions; new particle searches (dibaryons, excited quarks,
supersymmetric particles, electron compositeness, Higgs particle).



                                                                                          ISBN 981-238-356-5
World Scientific
www. worldscientific. com
5262 he                                                                                   789812"383563'
